J.R.R. 

TOLKIEN 

Edited Iry CHRISTOPHER TOLKIEN 



IKE CHILDREN of hurin 

The Tale of the Children of Hurin 


J.R.R. TOLKIEN 


Edited by Christopher Tolkien 
Illustrated by Alan Lee 







Table of contents 


Preface 
Introduction 
Note On Pronunciation 

Chapter I 

Chapter II 

Chapter III 

Chapter IV 

Chapter V 

Chapter VI 

Chapter VII 

Chapter VIII 

Chapter IX 

Chapter X 

Chapter XI 

Chapter XII 

Chapter XIII 

Chapter XIV 

Chapter XV 

Chapter XVI 

Chapter XVII 

Chapter XVIII 

Genealogies 

Appendix 

The Composition Of The Text 

List Of Names 
Note On The Map 

Map 


The Childhood Of Torin 

The Battle Of Unnumbered Tears 

The Words Of Hurin And Morgoth 

The Departure Of Turin 

Turin In Doriath 

Turin Among The Outlaws 

Of Mim The Dwarf 

The Land Of Bow And Helm 

The Death Of Beleg 

Turin In Nargothrond 

The Fall Of Nargothrond 

The Return Of Turin To Dor-Lomin 

The Coming Of Turin Into Brethil 

The Journey Of Morwen And Nienor To Nargothrond 

Nienor In Brethil 

The Coming Of Glaurung 

The Death Of Glaurung 

The Death Of Turin 


PREFACE 


It is undeniable that there are a very great many readers of The Lord of the Rings for 
whom the legends of the Elder Days (as previously published in varying forms in The 
Silmarillion, Unfinished Tales, and The History of Middle-earth) are altogether unknown, 
unless by their repute as strange and inaccessible in mode and manner. For this reason it 
has seemed to me for a long time that there was a good case for presenting my father's 
long version of the legend of the Children of Hurin as an independent work, between its 
own covers, with a minimum of editorial presence, and above all in continuous narrative 
without gaps or interruptions, if this could be done without distortion or invention, 
despite the unfinished state in which he left some parts of it. 

I have thought that if the story of the fate of Turin and Nienor, the children of Hurin and 
Morwen, could be presented in this way, a window might be opened onto a scene and a 
story set in an u nkn own Middle-earth that are vivid and immediate, yet conceived as 
handed down from remote ages: the drowned lands in the west beyond the Blue 
Mountains where Treebeard walked in his youth, and the life of Turin Turambar, in Dor- 
lomin, Doriath, Nargothrond, and the Forest of Brethil. 

This book is thus primarily addressed to such readers as may perhaps recall that the hide 
of Shelob was so horrendously hard that it 'could not be pierced by any strength of men, 
not though Elf or Dwarf should forge the steel or the hand of Beren or of Turin wield if, 
or that Elrond named Turin to Frodo at Rivendell as one of 'the mighty Elf- friends of old'; 
but know no more of him. 

When my father was a young man, during the years of the First World War and long 
before there was any inkling of the tales that were to form the narrative of The Hobbit or 
The Lord of the Rings, he began the writing of a collection of stories that he called The 
Book of Lost Tales. That was his first work of imaginative literature, and a substantial 
one, for though it was left unfinished there are fourteen completed tales. It was in The 
Book of Lost Tales that there first appeared in narrative the Gods, or Valar; Elves and 
Men as the Children of Iluvatar (the Creator); 

Melkor-Morgoth the great Enemy; Balrogs and Ores; and the lands in which the Tales are 
set, Valinor 'land of the Gods' beyond the western ocean, and the 'Great Lands’ 

(afterwards called 'Middle-earth', between the seas of east and west). 

Among the Lost Tales three were of much greater length and fullness, and all three are 
concerned with Men as well as Elves: they are The Tale of Tinuviel (which appears in 
brief form in The Lord of the Rings as the story of Beren and Luthien that Aragorn told to 
the hobbits on Weathertop; this my father wrote in 1917), Turambar and the Foaloke 
(Turin Turambar and the Dragon, certainly in existence by 1919, if not before), and The 
Fall of Gondolin (1916-17). In an often-quoted passage of a long letter describing his 
work that my father wrote in 1951, three years before the publication of The Fellowship 
of the Ring, he told of his early ambition: 'once upon a time (my crest has long since 



fallen) I had a mind to make a body of more or less connected legend, ranging from the 
large and cosmogonic, to the level of romantic fairy-story - the larger founded on the 
lesser in contact with the earth, the lesser drawing splendour from the vast backcloths? I 
would draw some of the great tales in fullness, and leave many only placed in the 
scheme, and sketched.’ 

It is seen from this reminiscence that from far back it was a part of his conception of what 
came to be called The Silmarillion that some of the ’Tales' should be told in much fuller 
form; and indeed in that same letter of 195 1 he referred expressly to the three stories 
which I have mentioned above as being much the longest in The Book of Lost Tales. 

Here he called the tale of Beren and Luthien ’the chief of the stories of The Silmarillion’, 
and of it he said: ’the story is (I think a beautiful and powerful) heroic-fairy-romance, 
receivable in itself with only a very general vague knowledge of the background. But it is 
also a fundamental link in the cycle, deprived of its full significance out of its place 
therein.’ ’There are other stories almost equally full in treatment,' he went on, 'and equally 
independent, and yet linked to the general history': these are The Children of Hurin and 
The Fall of Gondolin. 

It thus seems unquestionable, from my father's own words, that if he could achieve final 
and finished narratives on the scale he desired, he saw the three 'Great Tales' of the Elder 
Days (Beren and Luthien, the Children of Hurin, and the Fall of Gondolin) as works 
sufficiently complete in themselves as not to demand knowledge of the great body of 
legend known as The Silmarillion. On the other hand, as my father observed in the same 
place, the tale of the Children of Hurin is integral to the history of Elves and Men in the 
Elder Days, and there are necessarily a good many references to events and 
circumstances in that larger story. 

It would be altogether contrary to the conception of this book to burden its reading with 
an abundance of notes giving infonnation about persons and events that are in any case 
seldom of real importance to the immediate narrative. However, it may be found helpful 
here and there if some such assistance is provided, and I have accordingly given in the 
Introduction a very brief sketch of Beleriand and its peoples near the end of the Elder 
Days, when Turin and Nienor were born; and, as well as a map of Beleriand and the lands 
to the North, I have included a list of all names occurring in the text with very concise 
indications concerning each, and simplified genealogies. 

At the end of the book is an Appendix in two parts: the first concerned with my father’s 
attempts to achieve a final form for the three tales, and the second with the composition 
of the text in this book, which differs in many respects from that in Unfinished Tales. 

I am very grateful to my son Adam Tolkien for his indispensable help in the arrangement 
and presentation of the material in the Introduction and Appendix, and for easing the 
book into the (to me) daunting world of electronic transmission. 



INTRODUCTION 


Middle-earth in the Elder Days The character of Turin was of deep significance to my 
father, and in dialogue of directness and immediacy he achieved a poignant portrait of his 
boyhood, essential to the whole: his severity and lack of gaiety, his sense of justice and 
his compassion; of Hurin also, quick, gay, and sanguine, and of Morwen his mother, 
reserved, courageous, and proud; and of the life of the household in the cold country of 
Dor-lomin during the years, already full of fear, after Morgoth broke the Siege of 
Angband, before Turin was born. 

But all this was in the Elder Days, the First Age of the world, in a time unimaginably 
remote. The depth in time to which this story reaches back was memorably conveyed in a 
passage in The Lord of the Rings. At the great council in Rivendell Elrond spoke of the 
Last Alliance of Elves and Men and the defeat of Sauron at the end of the Second Age, 
more than three thousand years before: Thereupon Elrond paused a while and sighed. 'I 
remember well the splendour of their banners,’ he said. 

’It recalled to me the glory of the Elder Days and the hosts of Beleriand, so many great 
princes and captains were assembled. And yet not so many, nor so fair, as when 
Thangorodrim was broken, and the Elves deemed that evil was ended for ever, and it was 
not so.’ 

'You remember?' said Frodo, speaking his thought aloud in his astonishment. 'But I 
thought,' he stammered as Elrond turned towards him, 'I thought that the fall of Gilgalad 
was a long age ago.' 

'So it was indeed,' answered Elrond gravely. 'But my memory reaches back even to the 
Elder Days. Earendil was my sire, who was bom in Gondolin before its fall; and my 
mother was Elwing, daughter of Dior, son of Luthien of Doriath. I have seen three ages in 
the West of the world, and many defeats, and many fruitless victories.' 

Some six and a half thousand years before the Council of Elrond was held in Rivendell, 
Turin was born in Dor-lomin, 'in the winter of the year,' as is recorded in the Annals of 
Beleriand, 'with omens of sorrow’. 

But the tragedy of his life is by no means comprehended solely in the portrayal of 
character, for he was condemned to live trapped in a malediction of huge and mysterious 
power, the curse of hatred set by Morgoth upon Hurin and Morwen and their children, 
because Hurin defied him, and refused his will. And Morgoth, the Black Enemy, as he 
came to be called, was in his origin, as he declared to Hurin brought captive before him, 
'Melkor, first and mightiest of the Valar, who was before the world.’ 

Now become permanently incarnate, in form a gigantic and majestic, but terrible, King in 
the north-west of Middle-earth, he was physically present in his huge fortress of 
Angband, the Hells of Iron: the black reek that issued from the summits of 



Thangorodrim, the mountains that he piled above Angband, could be seen far off staining 
the northern sky. It is said in the Annals of Beleriand that ’the gates of Morgoth were but 
one hundred and fifty leagues distant from the bridge of Menegroth; far and yet all too 
near.’ These words refer to the bridge leading to the dwellings of the Elvish king Thingol, 
who took Turin to be his fosterson: they were called Menegroth, the Thousand Caves, far 
south and east of Dor-lomin. 

But being incarnate Morgoth was afraid. My father wrote of him: 'As he grew in malice, 
and sent forth from himself the evil that he conceived in lies and creatures of wickedness, 
his power passed into them and was dispersed, and he himself became ever more earth- 
bound, unwilling to issue from his dark strongholds.’ Thus when Fingolfin, High King of 
the Noldorin Elves, rode alone to Angband to challenge Morgoth to combat, he cried at 
the gate: 'Come forth, thou coward king, to fight with thine own hand! Den-dweller, 
wielder of thralls, liar and lurker, foe of Gods and Elves, come! For I would see thy 
craven face.' Then (it is told) 'Morgoth came. For he could not refuse such a challenge 
before the face of his captains.' He fought with the great hammer Grond, which at each 
blow made a great pit, and he beat Fingolfin to the ground; but as he died he pinned the 
great foot of Morgoth to the earth, 'and the black blood gushed forth and filled the pits of 
Grond. Morgoth went ever halt thereafter.' So also, when Beren and Luthien, in the 
shapes of a wolf and a bat, made their way into the deepest hall in Angband, where 
Morgoth sat, Luthien cast a spell on him: and 'suddenly he fell, as a hill sliding in 
avalanche, and hurled like thunder from his throne lay prone upon the floors of hell. The 
iron crown rolled echoing from his head.’ 

The curse of such a being, who can claim that 'the shadow of my purpose lies upon Arda 
[the Earth], and all that is in it bends slowly and surely to my will', is unlike the curses or 
imprecations of beings of far less power. Morgoth is not 'invoking' evil or calamity on 
Hurin and his children, he is not 'calling on' a higher power to be the agent: for he, 
'Master of the fates of Arda’ as he named himself to Hurin, intends to bring about the ruin 
of his enemy by the force of his own gigantic will. Thus he 'designs’ the future of those 
whom he hates, and so he says to Hurin: 'Upon all whom you love my thought shall 
weigh as a cloud of Doom, and it shall bring them down into darkness and despair.' 

The tonnent that he devised for Hurin was 'to see with Morgoth's eyes’. 

My father gave a definition of what this meant: if one were forced to look into Morgoth's 
eye he would 'see' (or receive in his mind from Morgoth's mind) a compellingly credible 
picture of events, distorted by Morgoth's bottomless malice; and if indeed any could 
refuse Morgoth's command, Hurin did not. This was in part, my father said, because his 
love of his kin and his anguished anxiety for them made him desire to learn all that he 
could of them, no matter what the source; and in part from pride, believing that he had 
defeated Morgoth in debate, and that he could 'outstare' Morgoth, or at least retain his 
critical reason and distinguish between fact and malice. 



Throughout Turin's life from the time of his departure from Dor-lomin, and the life of his 
sister Nienor who never saw her father, this was the fate of Hurin, seated immovably in a 
high place of Thangorodrim in increasing bitterness inspired by his tormentor. 

In the tale of Turin, who named himself Turambar 'Master of Fate', the curse of Moigoth 
seems to be seen as power unleashed to work evil, seeking out its victims; so the fallen 
Vala himself is said to fear that Turin 'would grow to such a power that the curse that he 
had laid upon him would become void, and he would escape the doom that had been 
designed for him' (p. 147). And afterwards in Nargothrond Turin concealed his true 
name, so that when Gwindor revealed it he was angered: 'You have done ill to me, friend, 
to betray my right name, and call down my doom upon me, from which I would lie hid.’ 

It was Gwindor who had told Turin of the rumour that ran through Angband, where 
Gwindor had been held prisoner, that Morgoth had laid a curse on Hurin and all his kin. 
But now he replied to Turin's wrath: 'the doom lies in yourself, not in your name.’ 

So essential is this complex conception in the story that my father even proposed an 
alternative title to it: Narn e-'Rach Morgoth, The Tale of the Curse of Morgoth. And his 
view of it is seen in these words: 'So ended the tale of Turin the hapless; the worst of the 
works of Morgoth among Men in the ancient world.’ 

When Treebeard strode through the forest of Fangorn carrying Merry and Pippin each in 
the crook of his ann he sang to them of places that he had known in remote times, and of 
the trees that grew there: 

In the willow-meads of Tasarinan I walked in the Spring. 

Ah! the sight and the smell of the Spring in Nan-tasarion! 

And I said that was good. 

I wandered in Summer in the elm- woods of Ossiriand. 

Ah! the light and the music in the Summer by the Seven Rivers of Ossir! 

And I thought that was best. 

To the beeches of Neldoreth I came in the Autumn. 

Ah! the gold and the red and the sighing of leaves in the Autumn in Taur-na-Neldor! 

It was more than my desire. 

To the pine-trees upon the highland of Dorthonion I climbed in the Winter. 

Ah! the wind and the whiteness and the black branches of Winter upon Orod-na-Thon! 



My voice went up and sang in the sky. 


And now all those lands lie under the wave. And I walk in Ambarona, in Tauremorna, in 
Aldalome, In my own land, in the country of Fangorn, Where the roots are long, And the 
years lie thicker than the leaves In Tauremornalome. 

The memory of Treebeard, 'Ent the earthbom, old as mountains', was indeed long. He 
was remembering ancient forests in the great country of Beleriand, which was destroyed 
in the tumults of the Great Battle at the end of the Elder Days. The Great Sea poured in 
and drowned all the lands west of the Blue Mountains, called Ered Luin and Ered Lindon: 
so that the map accompanying The Silmarillion ends in the east with that mountain-chain, 
whereas the map accompanying The Lord of the Rings ends in the west with the same 
range; and the coastal lands beyond the mountains named on that map Forlindon and 
Harlindon (North Lindon and South Lindon) were all that remained in the Third Age of 
the country called both Ossiriand, Land of Seven Rivers, and also Lindon, in whose elm- 
woods Treebeard once walked. 

He walked also among the great pine-trees on the highland of Dorthonion ('Land of 
Pines'), which afterwards came to be called Taur-nu-Fuin, 'the Forest under Night', when 
Morgoth turned it into 'a region of dread and dark enchantment, of wandering and 
despair' (p. 152); and he came to Neldoreth, the northern forest of Doriath, realm of 
Thingol. 

It was in Beleriand and the lands to the north that Turin's terrible destiny was played out; 
and indeed both Dorthonion and Doriath where Treebeard walked were crucial in his life. 
He was bom into a world of warfare, though he was still a child when the last and 
greatest battle in the wars of Beleriand was fought. A very brief sketch of how this came 
about will answer questions that arise and references that are made in the course of the 
narrative. 

In the north the boundaries of Beleriand seem to have been formed by the Ered Wethrin, 
the Mountains of Shadow, beyond which lay Hurin's country, Dor-lomin, a part of 
Hithlum; while in the east Beleriand extended to the feet of the Blue Mountains. Further 
east lay lands that scarcely appear in the history of the Elder Days; but the peoples that 
shaped that history came out of the east by the passes of the Blue Mountains. 

The Elves appeared on earth far off in the distant east, beside a lake that was named 
Cuivienen, Water of Awakening; and thence they were summoned by the Valar to leave 
Middle-earth, and passing over the Great Sea to come to the 'Blessed Realm’ of Aman in 
the west of the world, the land of the Gods. Those who accepted the summons were led 
on a great march across Middle-earth from Cuivienen by the Vala Orome, the Hunter, 
and they are called the Eldar, the Elves of the Great Journey, the High Elves: distinct 
from those who, refusing the summons, chose Middle-earth for their land and their 
destiny. They are the 'lesser Elves', called Avari, the Unwilling. 



But not all the Eldar, though they had crossed the Blue Mountains, departed over the Sea; 
and those who remained in Beleriand are named the Sindar, the Grey Elves. Their high 
king was Thingol (which means 'Grey-cloak'), who ruled from Menegroth, the Thousand 
Caves in Doriath. 

And not all the Eldar who crossed the Great Sea remained in the land of the Valar; for 
one of their great kindreds, the Noldor (the 'Loremasters'), returned to Middle-earth, and 
they are called the Exiles. The prime mover in their rebellion against the Valar was 
Feanor, 'Spirit of Fire': he was the eldest son of Finwe, who had led the host of the 
Noldor from Cuivienen, but was now dead. This cardinal event in the history of the Elves 
was thus briefly conveyed by my father in Appendix A to The Lord of the Rings: 

Feanor was the greatest of the Eldar in arts and lore, but also the proudest and most 
selfwilled. He wrought the Three Jewels, the Silmarilli, and filled them with the radiance 
of the Two Trees, Telperion and Laurelin, that gave light to the land of the Valar. The 
Jewels were coveted by Morgoth the Enemy, who stole them and, after destroying the 
Trees, took them to Middle-earth, and guarded them in his great fortress of Thangorodrim 
[the mountains above Angband]. Against the will of the Valar Feanor forsook the Blessed 
Realm and went in exile to Middle-earth, leading with him a great part of his people; for 
in his pride he purposed to recover the Jewels from Morgoth by force. 

Thereafter followed the hopeless war of the Eldar and the Edain against Thangorodrim, in 
which they were at last utterly defeated. 

Feanor was slain in battle soon after the return of the Noldor to Middle-earth, and his 
seven sons held wide lands in the east of Beleriand, between Dorthonion (Taur-nu-Fuin) 
and the Blue Mountains; but their power was destroyed in the terrible Battle of 
Unnumbered Tears which is described in The Children of Hurin, and thereafter 'the Sons 
of Feanor wandered as leaves before the wind' (p. 61). 

The second son of Finwe was Fingolfin (the half-brother of Feanor), who was held the 
overlord of all the Noldor; and he with his son Fingon ruled Hithlum, which lay to the 
north and west of the great chain of Ered Wethrin, the Mountains of Shadow. Fingolfin 
dwelt in Mithrim, by the great lake of that name, while Fingon held Dor-lomin in the 
south of Hithlum. Their chief fortress was Barad Eithel (the Tower of the Well) at Eithel 
Sirion (Sirion’s Well), where the river Sirion rose in the east face of the Mountains of 
Shadow: Sador, the old crippled servant of Hurin and Morwen, served as a soldier there 
for many years, as he told Turin (pp. 41-42). After Fingolfin’s death in single combat 
with Morgoth Fingon became the High King of the Noldor in his stead. Turin saw him 
once, when he 'and many of his lords had ridden through Dor-lomin and passed over the 
bridge of Nen Lalaith, glittering in silver and white’ (p. 40). 

The second son of Fingolfin was Turgon. He dwelt at first, after the return of the Noldor, 
in the house named Vinyamar, beside the sea in the region of Nevrast, west of Dor-lomin; 
but he built in secret the hidden city of Gondolin, which stood on a hill in the midst of the 
plain called Tumladen, wholly surrounded by the Encircling Mountains, east of the river 



Sirion. When Gondolin was built, after many years of labour, Turgon removed from 
Vinyamar and dwelt with his people, both Noldor and Sindar, in Gondolin; and for 
centuries this Elvish redoubt of great beauty was preserved in the most profound secrecy, 
its only entry undiscoverable and heavily guarded, so that no stranger could ever pass in; 
and Morgoth was unable to learn where it lay. Not until the Battle of Unnumbered Tears, 
when more than three hundred and fifty years had passed since he left Vinyamar, did 
Turgon emerge with his great army from Gondolin. 

The third son of Finwe, the brother of Fingolfin and half-brother of Feanor, was Finarfin. 
He did not return to Middle-earth, but his sons and daughter came with the host of 
Fingolfin and his sons. The eldest son of Finarfin was Finrod, who, inspired by the 
magnificence and beauty of Menegroth in Doriath, founded the underground fortress-city 
of Nargothrond, for which he was named Felagund, interpreted to mean 'Lord of Caves' 
or 'Cave-hewer' in the tongue of the Dwarves. The doors of Nargothrond opened onto the 
gorge of the river Narog in West Beleriand, where that river passed through the high hills 
called Taur-en-Faroth, or the High Faroth; but Finrod’s realm extended far and wide, east 
to the river Sirion, and west to the river Nenning that reached the sea at the haven of 
Eglarest. But Finrod was slain in the dungeons of Sauron, chief servant of Morgoth, and 
Orodreth, the second son of Finarfin, took the crown of Nargothrond: this took place in 
the year following the birth of Turin in Dor-lomin. 

The other sons of Finarfin, Angrod and Aegnor, vassals of their brother Finrod, dwelt on 
Dorthonion, looking northwards over the vast plain of Ard-galen. Galadriel, Finrod's 
sister, dwelt long in Doriath with Melian the Queen. Melian was a Maia, a spirit of great 
power who took human form and dwelt in the forests of Beleriand with King Thingol: 
she was the mother of Luthien, and the fore-mother of Elrond. Not long before the return 
of the Noldor from Aman, when great annies out of Angband came south into Beleriand, 
Melian (in the words of The Silmarillion) 'put forth her power and fenced all that 
dominion [the forests of Neldoreth and Region] round about with an unseen wall of 
shadow and bewildennent: the Girdle of Melian, that none thereafter could pass against 
her will or the will of King Thingol, unless one should come with a power greater than 
that of Melian the Maia.’ Thereafter the land was named Doriath, 'the Land of the Fence'. 

In the sixtieth year after the return of the Noldor, ending many years of peace, a great 
host of Ores came down from Angband, but was utterly defeated and destroyed by the 
Noldor. This was called Dagor Aglareb, the Glorious Battle; but the Elvish lords took 
warning from it, and set the Siege of Angband, which lasted for almost four hundred 
years. 

It was said that Men (whom the Elves called Atani 'the Second’, and Hildor 'the 
Followers') arose far off in the east of Middle-earth towards the end of the Elder Days; 
but of their earliest history the Men who entered Beleriand in the days of the Long Peace, 
when Angband was besieged and its gates shut, would never speak. The leader of these 
first Men to cross the Blue Mountains was named Beor the Old; and to Finrod Felagund, 
King of Nargothrond, who first encountered them Beor declared: 'A darkness lies behind 
us; and we have turned our backs on it, and we do not desire to return thither even in 



thought. Westwards our hearts have been turned, and we believe that there we shall find 
Light.’ Sador, the old servant of Hurin, spoke in the same way to Turin in his boyhood (p. 
43). But it was said afterwards that when Morgoth learned of the arising of Men he left 
Angband for the last time and went into the East; and that the first Men to enter Beleriand 
’had repented and rebelled against the Dark Power, and were cruelly hunted and 
oppressed by those that worshipped it, and its servants'. 

These Men belonged to three Houses, known as the House of Beor, the House of Hador, 
and the House of Hale th. Hurin’s father Galdor the Tall was of the House of Hador, being 
indeed his son; but his mother was of the House of Haleth, while Morwen his wife was of 
the House of Beor, and related to Beren. 

The people of the Three Houses were the Edain (the Sindarin form of Atani), and they 
were called Elf- friends. Hador dwelt in Hithlum and was given the lordship of Dor-lomin 
by King Fingolfin; the people of Beor settled in Dorthonion; and the people of Haleth at 
this time dwelt in the Forest of Brethil. After the ending of the Siege of Angband Men of 
a very different sort came over the mountains; they were commonly referred to as 
Easterlings, and some of them played an important part in the story of Turin. 

The Siege of Angband ended with a terrible suddenness (though long prepared) on a 
night of midwinter, 395 years after it had begun. Morgoth released rivers of fire that ran 
down from Thangorodrim, and the great grassy plain of Ard-galen that lay to the north of 
the highland of Dorthonion was transformed into a parched and arid waste, known 
thereafter by a changed name, Anfauglith, the Gasping Dust. 

This catastrophic assault was called Dagor Bragollach, the Battle of Sudden Flame. 
Glaurung Father of Dragons emerged from Angband now for the first time in his full 
might; vast armies of Ores poured southwards; the Elvish lords of Dorthonion were slain, 
and a great part of the warriors of Beor's people. King Fingolfin and his son Fingon were 
driven back with the warriors of Hithlum to the fortress of Eithel Sirion in the east face of 
the Mountains of Shadow, and in its defence Hador Goldenhead was killed. Then Galdor, 
Hurin's father, became the lord of Dor-lomin; for the torrents of fire were stopped by the 
barrier of the Mountains of Shadow, and Hithlum and Dor-lomin remained unconquered. 

It was in the year after the Bragollach that Fingolfin, in a fury of despair, rode to 
Angband and challenged Morgoth. Two years later Hurin and Huor went to Gondolin. 
After four more years, in a renewed assault on Hithlum, Hurin's father Galdor was slain 
in the fortress of Eithel Sirion: Sador was there, as he told Turin (p. 42), and saw Hurin 
(then a young man of twenty-one) 'take up his lordship and his command’. 

All these things were fresh in memory in Dor-lomin when Turin was born, nine years 
after the Battle of Sudden Flame. 



NOTE ON PRONUNCIATION 


The following note is intended to clarify a few main features in the pronunciation of 
names. 

Consonants C: always has the value of k, never of s; thus Celebros is 'Kelebros', not 
'Selebros'. 

CH: always has the value of ch in Scots loch or German buck, never that of ch in English 
church; examples are Anach, Narn i chin Hurin. 

DH: is always used to represent the sound of a voiced ('soft') th in English, that is the th 
in then, not the th in thin. Examples are Gloredhel, Eledhwen, Maedhros. 

G: always has the sound of English g in get; thus Region is not pronounced like English 
region, and the first syllable of Ginglith is as in English begin, not as in gin. 

Vowels AI: has the sound of English eye; thus the second syllable of Edain is like 
English dine, not Dane. 

AU: has the value of English ow in town; thus the first vowel of Sauron is like English 
sour, not sore. 

El: as in Teiglin has the sound of English grey. 

IE: should not be pronounced as in English piece, but with both the vowels i and e 
sounded, and run together; thus Ni-enor, not 'Neenor'. 

AE: as in Aegnor, Nirnaeth, is a combination of the individual vowels, a-e, but may be 
pronounced in the same way as AI. 

EA and EO: are not run together, but constitute two syllables; these combinations are 
written ea and eo, as in Beor, or at the beginning of names Ea, Eo, as in Earendil. 

U: in names like Hurin, Turin, should be pronounced oo; thus 'Toorin', not 'Tyoorin'. 

IR, UR: before a consonant (as in Cirdan, Gurthang) should not be pronounced as in 
English fir, fur, but as in English, eer, oor. 

E: at the end of words is always pronounced as a distinct vowel, and in this position is 
written e. It is always pronounced in the middle of words like Celebros, Menegroth. 



CHAPTER I 


THE CHILDHOOD OF TORIN 


Hador Goldenhead was a lord of the Edain and well-beloved by the Eldar. 

He dwelt while his days lasted under the lordship of Fingolfin, who gave to him wide 
lands in that region of Hithlum which was called Dor-lomin. 

His daughter Gloredhel wedded Haldir son of Halinir, lord of the Men of Brethil; and at 
the same feast his son Galdor the Tall wedded Hareth, the daughter of Halinir. 

Galdor and Hareth had two sons, Hurin and Huor. Hurin was by three years the elder, but 
he was shorter in stature than other men of his kin; in this he took after his mother's 
people, but in all else he was like Hador, his grandfather, strong in body and fiery of 
mood. But the fire in him burned steadily, and he had great endurance of will. Of all Men 
of the North he knew most of the counsels of the Noldor. Huor his brother was tall, the 
tallest of all the Edain save his own son Tuor only, and a swift runner; but if the race 
were long and hard Hurin would be the first home, for he ran as strongly at the end of the 
course as at the beginning. There was great love between the brothers, and they were 
seldom apart in their youth. 

Hurin wedded Morwen, the daughter of Baragund son of Bregolas of the House of Beor; 
and she was thus of close kin to Beren One-hand. Morwen was dark-haired and tall, and 
for the light of her glance and the beauty of her face men called her Eledhwen, the elven- 
fair; but she was somewhat stern of mood and proud. The sorrows of the House of Beor 
saddened her heart; for she came as an exile to Dor-lomin from Dorthonion after the ruin 
of the Bragollach. 

Turin was the name of the eldest child of Hurin and Morwen, and he was born in that 
year in which Beren came to Doriath and found Luthien Tinuvicl, Thingol's daughter. 
Morwen bore a daughter also to Hurin, and she was named Urwen; but she was called 
Lalaith, which is Laughter, by all that knew her in her short life. 

Huor wedded Rian, the cousin of Morwen; she was the daughter of Belegund son of 
Bregolas. By hard fate was she bom into such days, for she was gentle of heart and loved 
neither hunting nor war. Her love was given to trees and to the flowers of the wild, and 
she was a singer and a maker of songs. Two months only had she been wedded to Huor 
when he went with his brother to the Nirnaeth Arnoediad, and she never saw him again. 

But now the tale returns to Hurin and Huor in the days of their youth. 



It is said that for a while the sons of Galdor dwelt in Brethil as foster-sons of Haldir their 
uncle, after the custom of Northern men in those days. They often went to battle with the 
Men of Brethil against the Ores, who now harried the northern borders of their land; for 
Hurin, though only seventeen years of age, was strong, and Huor the younger was already 
as tall as most full-grown men of that people. 

On a time Hurin and Huor went with a company of scouts, but they were ambushed by 
the Ores and scattered, and the brothers were pursued to the ford of Brithiach. There they 
would have been taken or slain but for the power of Ulmo that was still strong in the 
waters of Sirion; and it is said that a mist arose from the river and hid them from their 
enemies, and they escaped over the Brithiach into Dimbar. There they wandered in great 
hardship among the hills beneath the sheer walls of the Crissaegrim, until they were 
bewildered in the deceits of that land and knew not the way to go on or to return. There 
Thorondor espied them, and he sent two of his Eagles to their aid; and the Eagles bore 
them up and brought them beyond the Encircling Mountains to the secret vale of 
Tumladen and the hidden city of Gondolin, which no Man had yet seen. 

There Turgon the King received them well, when he learned of their kin; for Hador was 
an Elf-friend, and Ulmo, moreover, had counselled Turgon to deal kindly with the sons of 
that House, from whom help should come to him at need. Hurin and Huor dwelt as guests 
in the King's house for well nigh a year; and it is said that in this time Hurin, whose mind 
was swift and eager, gained much lore of the Elves, and learned also something of the 
counsels and purposes of the King. For Turgon took great liking for the sons of Galdor, 
and spoke much with them; and he wished indeed to keep them in Gondolin out of love, 
and not only for his law that no stranger, be he Elf or Man, who found the way to the 
secret kingdom or looked upon the city should ever depart again, until the King should 
open the leaguer, and the hidden people should come forth. 

But Hurin and Huor desired to return to their own people and share in the wars and griefs 
that now beset them. And Hurin said to Turgon: 'Lord, we are but mortal Men, and unlike 
the Eldar. They may endure for long years awaiting battle with their enemies in some far 
distant day; but for us the time is short, and our hope and strength soon wither. 

Moreover we did not find the road to Gondolin, and indeed we do not know surely where 
this city stands; for we were brought in fear and wonder by the high ways of the air, and 
in mercy our eyes were veiled.’ Then Turgon granted his prayer, and he said: 'By the way 
that you came you have leave to return, if Thorondor is willing. I grieve at this parting; 
yet in a little while, as the Eldar account it, we may meet again.’ 

But Maeglin, the King's sister-son, who was mighty in Gondolin, grieved not at all at 
their going, though he begrudged them the favour of the King, for he had no love for any 
of the kindred of Men; and he said to Hurin: 'The King's grace is greater than you know, 
and some might wonder wherefore the strict law is abated for two knave-children of Men. 
It would be safer if they had no choice but to abide here as our servants to their life's end.' 



’The King's grace is great indeed,' answered Hurin, 'but if our word is not enough, then 
we will swear oaths to you.’ And the brothers swore never to reveal the counsels of 
Turgon, and to keep secret all that they had seen in his realm. Then they took their leave, 
and the Eagles coming bore them away by night, and set them down in Dor-lomin before 
the dawn. 

Their kinsfolk rejoiced to see them, for messengers from Brethil had reported that they 
were lost; but they would not tell even to their father where they had been, save that they 
were rescued in the wilderness by the Eagles that brought them home. But Galdor said: 
'Did you then dwell a year in the wild? Or did the Eagles house you in their eyries? But 
you found food and fine raiment, and return as young princes, not as waifs of the wood.’ 
'Be content, father,' said Hurin, 'that we have returned; for only under an oath of silence 
was this pennitted. That oath is still on us.' Then Galdor questioned them no more, but he 
and many others guessed at the truth. For both the oath of silence and the Eagles pointed 
to Turgon, men thought. So the days passed, and the shadow of the fear of Morgoth 
lengthened. But in the four hundred and sixty-ninth year after the return of the Noldor to 
Middle-earth there was a stirring of hope among Elves and Men; for the rumour ran 
among them of the deeds of Beren and Luthien, and the putting to shame of Morgoth 
even upon his throne in Angband, and some said that Beren and Luthien yet lived, or had 
returned from the Dead. In that year also the great counsels of Maedhros were almost 
complete, and with the reviving strength of the Eldar and the Edain the advance of 
Morgoth was stayed, and the Ores were driven back from Beleriand. Then some began to 
speak of victories to come, and of redressing the Battle of the Bragollach, when 
Maedhros should lead forth the united hosts, and drive Morgoth underground, and seal 
the Doors of Angband. 

But the wiser were uneasy still, fearing that Maedhros revealed his growing strength too 
soon, and that Morgoth would be given time enough to take counsel against him. 'Ever 
will some new evil be hatched in Angband beyond the guess of Elves and Men,’ they 
said. And in the autumn of that year, to point their words, there came an ill wind from the 
North under leaden skies. The Evil Breath it was called, for it was pestilent; and many 
sickened and died in the fall of the year in the northern lands that bordered on the 
Anfauglith, and they were for the most part the children or the rising youth in the houses 
of Men. 

In that year Turin son of Hurin was yet only five years old, and Urwen his sister was 
three in the beginning of spring. Her hair was like the yellow lilies in the grass as she ran 
in the fields, and her laughter was like the sound of the merry stream that came singing 
out of the hills past the walls of her father's house. Nen Lalaith it was named, and after it 
all the people of the household called the child Lalaith, and their hearts were glad while 
she was among them. 

But Turin was loved less than she. He was dark-haired as his mother, and promised to be 
like her in mood also; for he was not merry, and spoke little, though he learned to speak 
early and ever seemed older than his years. Turin was slow to forget injustice or 
mockery; but the fire of his father was also in him, and he could be sudden and fierce. 



Yet he was quick to pity, and the hurts or sadness of living things might move him to 
tears; and he was like his father in this also, for Morwen was stem with others as with 
herself. He loved his mother, for her speech to him was forthright and plain; but his father 
he saw little, for Hurin was often long away from home with the host of Fingon that 
guarded Hithlum's eastern borders, and when he returned his quick speech, full of strange 
words and jests and half-meanings, bewildered Turin and made him uneasy. At that time 
all the warmth of his heart was for Lalaith his sister; but he played with her seldom, and 
liked better to guard her unseen and to watch her going upon grass or under tree, as she 
sang such songs as the children of the Edain made long ago when the tongue of the Elves 
was still fresh upon their lips. 

'Fair as an Elf-child is Lalaith,' said Hurin to Morwen; 'but briefer, alas! And so fairer, 
maybe, or dearer.’ And Turin hearing these words pondered them, but could not 
understand them. For he had seen no Elf-children. None of the Eldar at that time dwelt in 
his father's lands, and once only had he seen them, when King Fingon and many of his 
lords had ridden through Dor-lomin and passed over the bridge of Nen Lalaith, glittering 
in silver and white. 

But before the year was out the truth of his father's words was shown; for the Evil Breath 
came to Dor-lomin, and Turin took sick, and lay long in a fever and dark dream. And 
when he was healed, for such was his fate and the strength of life that was in him, he 
asked for Lalaith. But his nurse answered: 'Speak no more of Lalaith, son of Hurin; but of 
your sister Urwen you must ask tidings of your mother.' 

And when Morwen came to him, Turin said to her: 'I am no longer sick, and I wish to see 
Urwen; but why must I not say Lalaith any more?' 

'Because Urwen is dead, and laughter is stilled in this house,' she answered. 'But you live, 
son of Morwen; and so does the Enemy who has done this to us.' 

She did not seek to comfort him any more than herself; for she met her grief in silence 
and coldness of heart. But Hurin mourned openly, and he took up his harp and would 
make a song of lamentation; but he could not, and he broke his harp, and going out he 
lifted up his hand towards the North, crying: 'Marrer of Middle-earth, would that I might 
see you face to face, and mar you as my lord Fingolfin did!’ 

But Turin wept bitterly at night alone, though to Morwen he never again spoke the name 
of his sister. To one friend only he turned at that time, and to him he spoke of his sorrow 
and the emptiness of the house. This friend was named Sador, a house-man in the service 
of Hurin; he was lame, and of small account. He had been a woodman, and by ill-luck or 
the mishandling of his axe he had hewn his right foot, and the footless leg had shrunken; 
and Turin called him Labadal, which is 'Hopafoot' , though the name did not displease 
Sador, for it was given in pity and not in scorn. Sador worked in the outbuildings, to 
make or mend things of little worth that were needed in the house, for he had some skill 
in the working of wood; and Turin would fetch him what he lacked, to spare his leg, and 
sometimes he would carry off secretly some tool or piece of timber that he found 



unwatched, if he thought his friend might use it. Then Sador smiled, but bade him return 
the gifts to their places; ’Give with a free hand, but give only your own,' he said. He 
rewarded as he could the kindness of the child, and carved for him the figures of men and 
beasts; but Turin delighted most in Sador's tales, for he had been a young man in the days 
of the Bragollach, and loved now to dwell upon the short days of his full manhood before 
his maiming. 

'That was a great battle, they say, son of Hurin. I was called from my tasks in the wood in 
the need of that year; but I was not in the Bragollach, or I might have got my hurt with 
more honour. For we came too late, save to bear back the bier of the old lord, Hador, who 
fell in the guard of King Fingolfin. I went for a soldier after that, and I was in Eithel 
Sirion, the great fort of the Elf-kings, for many years; or so it seems now, and the dull 
years since have little to mark them. In Eithel Sirion I was when the Black King assailed 
it, and Galdor your father's father was the captain there in the King's stead. He was slain 
in that assault; and I saw your father take up his lordship and his command, though but 
new come to manhood. There was a fire in him that made the sword hot in his hand, they 
said. Behind him we drove the Ores into the sand; and they have not dared to come 
within sight of the walls since that day. But alas! my love of battle was sated, for I had 
seen spilled blood and wounds enough; and I got leave to come back to the woods that I 
yearned for. And there I got my hurt; for a man that flies from his fear may find that he 
has only taken a short cut to meet it.' 

In this way Sador would speak to Turin as he grew older; and Turin began to ask many 
questions that Sador found hard to answer, thinking that others nearer akin should have 
had the teaching. And one day Turin said to him: 'Was Lalaith indeed like an Elf-child, as 
my father said? And what did he mean, when he said that she was briefer?' 

'Very like,' said Sador; 'for in their first youth the children of Men and Elves seem close 
akin. But the children of Men grow more swiftly, and their youth passes soon; such is our 
fate.’ 

Then Turin asked him: 'What is fate?' 

'As to the fate of Men,' said Sador, 'you must ask those that are wiser than Labadal. But 
as all can see, we weary soon and die; and by mischance many meet death even sooner. 
But the Elves do not weary, and they do not die save by great hurt. From wounds and 
griefs that would slay Men they may be healed; and even when their bodies are marred 
they return again, some say. It is not so with us.' 

'Then Lalaith will not come back?' said Turin. 'Where has she gone?' 

'She will not come back,' said Sador. 'But where she has gone no man knows; or I do not.' 


'Has it always been so? Or do we suffer some curse of the wicked King, perhaps, like the 
Evil Breath?’ 



’I do not know. A darkness lies behind us, and out of it few tales have come. The fathers 
of our fathers may have had things to tell, but they did not tell them. Even their names are 
forgotten. The Mountains stand between us and the life that they came from, flying from 
no man now knows what.' 

'Were they afraid?' said Turin. 

'It may be,' said Sador. 'It may be that we fled from the fear of the Dark, only to find it 
here before us, and nowhere else to fly to but the Sea.' 

'We are not afraid any longer,' said Turin, 'not all of us. My father is not afraid, and I will 
not be; or at least, as my mother, I will be afraid and not show it.' 

It seemed then to Sador that Turin's eyes were not the eyes of a child, and he thought: 
'Grief is a hone to a hard mind.’ But aloud he said: 'Son of Hurin and Morwen, how it will 
be with your heart Labadal cannot guess; but seldom and to few will you show what is in 
it.' 

Then Turin said: 'Perhaps it is better not to tell what you wish, if you cannot have it. But I 
wish, Labadal, that I were one of the Eldar. Then Lalaith might come back, and I should 
still be here, even if she were long away. I shall go as a soldier with an Elf-king as soon 
as I am able, as you did, Labadal.’ 

'You may leam much of them,' said Sador, and he sighed. 'They are a fair folk and 
wonderful, and they have a power over the hearts of Men. 

And yet I think sometimes that it might have been better if we had never met them, but 
had walked in lowlier ways. For already they are ancient in knowledge; and they are 
proud and enduring. In their light we are dimmed, or we burn with too quick a flame, and 
the weight of our doom lies the heavier on us.' 

'But my father loves them,’ said Turin, 'and he is not happy without them. He says that we 
have learned nearly all that we know from them, and have been made a nobler people; 
and he says that the Men that have lately come over the Mountains are hardly better than 
Ores.' 

'That is true,' answered Sador; 'true at least of some of us. But the up-climbing is painful, 
and from high places it is easy to fall low.' 

At this time Turin was almost eight years old, in the month of Gwaeron in the reckoning 
of the Edain, in the year that cannot be forgotten. 

Already there were rumours among his elders of a great mustering and gathering of arms, 
of which Turin heard nothing; though he marked that his father often looked steadfastly 
at him, as a man might look at something dear that he must part from. 



Now Hurin, knowing her courage and her guarded tongue, often spoke with Morwen of 
the designs of the Elven-kings, and of what might befall, if they went well or ill. His heart 
was high with hope, and he had little fear for the outcome of the battle; for it did not seem 
to him that any strength in Middle-earth could overthrow the might and splendour of the 
Eldar. 'They have seen the Light in the West,' he said, 'and in the end Darkness must flee 
from their faces.' Morwen did not gainsay him; for in Hurin's company the hopeful ever 
seemed the more likely. But there was knowledge of Elven-lore in her kindred also, and 
to herself she said: 'And yet did they not leave the Light, and are they not now shut out 
from it? It may be that the Lords of the West have put them out of their thought; and how 
then can even the Elder Children overcome one of the Powers?' 

No shadow of such doubt seemed to lie on Hurin Thalion; yet one morning in the spring 
of that year he awoke heavy as after unquiet sleep, and a cloud lay on his brightness that 
day; and in the evening he said suddenly: 'When I am summoned, Morwen Eledhwen, I 
shall leave in your keeping the heir of the House of Hador. The lives of Men are short, 
and in them there are many ill chances, even in time of peace.’ 

'That has ever been so,' she answered. 'But what lies under your words?' 

'Prudence, not doubt,' said Hurin; yet he looked troubled. 'But one who looks forward 
must see this: that things will not remain as they were. 

This will be a great throw, and one side must fall lower than it now stands. If it be the 
Elven-kings that fall, then it must go evilly with the Edain; and we dwell nearest to the 
Enemy. This land might pass into his dominion. But if things do go ill, I will not say to 
you: Do not be afraid! For you fear what should be feared, and that only; and fear does 
not dismay you. But I say: Do not wait! I shall return to you as I may, but do not wait! Go 
south as swiftly as you can - if I live I shall follow, and I shall find you, though I have to 
search through all Beleriand.’ 

'Beleriand is wide, and houseless for exiles,' said Morwen. 'Whither should I flee, with 
few or with many?’ 

Then Hurin thought for a while in silence. 'There is my mother's kin in Brethil,' he said. 
'That is some thirty leagues, as the eagle flies.' 

'If such an evil time should indeed come, what help would there be in Men?' said 
Morwen. 'The House of Beor has fallen. If the great House of Hador falls, in what holes 
shall the little Folk of Haleth creep?' 

'In such as they can find,’ said Hurin. 'But do not doubt their valour, though they are few 
and unlearned. Where else is hope?' 


'You do not speak of Gondolin,’ said Morwen. 



’No, for that name has never passed my lips,' said Hurin. 'Yet the word is true that you 
have heard: I have been there. But I tell you now truly, as I have told no other, and will 
not: I do not know where it stands.’ 

’But you guess, and guess near, I think,' said Morwen. 

'It may be so,' said Hurin. 'But unless Turgon himself released me from my oath, I could 
not tell that guess, even to you; and therefore your search would be vain. But were I to 
speak, to my shame, you would at best but come at a shut gate; for unless Turgon comes 
out to war (and of that no word has been heard, and it is not hoped) no one will come in.’ 

'Then if your kin are not hopeful, and your friends deny you,' said Morwen, 'I must take 
counsel for myself; and to me now comes the thought of Doriath.’ 

'Ever your aim is high,’ said Hurin. 

'Over-high, you would say?' said Morwen. 'But last of all defences will the Girdle of 
Melian be broken, I think; and the House of Beor will not be despised in Doriath. Am I 
not now kin of the king? For Beren son of Barahir was grandson of Bregor, as was my 
father also.’ 

'My heart does not lean to Thingol,' said Hurin. 'No help will come from him to King 
Fingon; and I know not what shadow falls on my spirit when Doriath is named.’ 

'At the name of Brethil my heart also is darkened,' said Morwen. 

Then suddenly Hurin laughed, and he said: 'Here we sit debating things beyond our 
reach, and shadows that come out of dream. Things will not go so ill; but if they do, then 
to your courage and counsel all is committed. Do then what your heart bids you; but do it 
swiftly. And if we gain our ends, then the Elven-kings are resolved to restore all the fiefs 
of Beor's house to his heir; and that is you, Morwen daughter of Baragund. 

Wide lordships we should then wield, and a high inheritance come to our son. Without 
the malice in the North he should come to great wealth, and be a king among Men.’ 

'Hurin Thalion,’ said Morwen, 'this I judge truer to say: that you look high, but I fear to 
fall low.’ 

'That at the worst you need not fear,' said Hurin. 

That night Turin half-woke, and it seemed to him that his father and mother stood beside 
his bed, and looked down on him in the light of the candles that they held; but he could 
not see their faces. 



On the morning of Turin's birthday Hurin gave his son a gift, an Elf- wrought knife, and 
the hilt and the sheath were silver and black; and he said: 'Heir of the House bf Hador, 
here is a gift for the day. 

But have a care! It is a bitter blade, and steel serves only those that can wield it. It will cut 
your hand as willingly as aught else.’ And setting Turin on a table he kissed his son, and 
said: 'You overtop me already, son of Morwen; soon you will be as high on your own 
feet. In that day many may fear your blade.' 

Then Turin ran from the room and went away alone, and in his heart was a warmth like 
the warmth of the sun upon the cold earth that sets growth astir. He repeated to himself 
his father's words, Heir of the House of Hador; but other words came also to his mind: 
Give with a free hand, but give of your own. And he went to Sador and cried: 'Labadal, it 
is my birthday, the birthday of the heir of the House of Hador! And I have brought you a 
gift to mark the day. Here is a knife, just such as you need; it will cut anything that you 
wish, as fine as a hair.’ 

Then Sador was troubled, for he knew well that Turin had himself received the knife that 
day; but men held it a grievous thing to refuse a free-given gift from any hand. He spoke 
then to him gravely: 'You come of a generous kin, Turin son of Hurin. I have done 
nothing to equal your gift, and I cannot hope to do better in the days that are left to me; 
but what I can do, I will.’ And when Sador drew the knife from the sheath he said: 'This is 
a gift indeed: a blade of elven steel. Long have I missed the feel of it.’ 

Hurin soon marked that Turin did not wear the knife, and he asked him whether his 
warning had made him fear it. Then Turin answered: 'No; but I gave the knife to Sador 
the woodwright.' 

'Do you then scorn your father's gift?' said Morwen; and again Turin answered: 'No; but I 
love Sador, and I am sorry for him.’ 

Then Hurin said: 'All three gifts were your own to give, Turin: love, pity, and the kn ife 
the least.' 

'Yet I doubt if Sador deserves them,’ said Morwen. 'He is self-maimed by his own want of 
skill, and he is slow with his tasks, for he spends much time on trifles unbidden.' 

'Give him pity nonetheless,' said Hurin. 'An honest hand and a true heart may hew amiss; 
and the harm may be harder to bear than the work of a foe.’ 

'But you must wait now for another blade,' said Morwen. 'Thus the gift shall be a true gift 
and at your own cost.' 


Nonetheless Turin marked that Sador was treated more kindly thereafter, and was set now 
to the making of a great chair for the lord to sit on in his hall. 



There came a bright morning in the month of Lothron when Turin was roused by sudden 
trumpets; and running to the doors he saw in the court a great press of men on foot and on 
horse, and all fully anned as for war. There also stood Hurin, and he spoke to the men 
and gave commands; and Turin learned that they were setting out that day for Barad 
Eithel. 

These were Hurin's guards and household men; but all the men of his land that could be 
spared were summoned. Some had gone already with Huor his father's brother; and many 
others would join the Lord of Dor-lomin on the road, and go behind his banner to the 
great muster of the King. 

Then Morwen bade farewell to Hurin without tears; and she said: 'I will guard what you 
leave in my keeping, both what is and what shall be.’ 

And Hurin answered her: 'Farewell, Lady of Dor-lomin; we ride now with greater hope 
than ever we have known before. Let us think that at this midwinter the feast shall be 
merrier than in all our years yet, with a fearless spring to follow after!' Then he lifted 
Turin to his shoulder, and cried to his men: 'Let the heir of the House of Hador see the 
light of your swords!' 

And the sun glittered on fifty blades as they leaped forth, and the court rang with the 
battle-cry of the Edain of the North: Lac ho calad! 

Drego morn! Flame Light! Flee Night! 

Then at last Hurin sprang into his saddle, and his golden banner was unfurled, and the 
trumpets sang again in the morning; and thus Hurin Thalion rode away to the Nirnaeth 
Amoediad. 

But Morwen and Turin stood still by the doors, until far away they heard the faint call of 
a single horn on the wind: Hurin had passed over the shoulder of the hill, beyond which 
he could see his house no more. 



CHAPTER II 


THE BATTLE OF UNNUMBERED TEARS 


Many songs are yet sung and many tales are yet told by the Elves of the Nirnaeth 
Amoediad, the Battle of Unnumbered Tears, in which Fingon fell and the flower of the 
Eldar withered. If all were now retold a man's life would not suffice for the hearing. Here 
then shall be recounted only those deeds which bear upon the fate of the House of Hador 
and the children of Hurin the Steadfast. 

Having gathered at length all the strength that he could Maedhros appointed a day, the 
morning of Midsummer. On that day the trumpets of the Eldar greeted the rising of the 
Sun, and in the east was raised the standard of the sons of Feanor; and in the west the 
standard of Fingon, King of the Noldor. 

Then Fingon looked out from the walls of Eithel Sirion, and his host was arrayed in the 
valleys and woods upon the east of Ered Wethrin, well hid from the eyes of the Enemy; 
but he knew that it was very great. For there all the Noldor of Hithlum were assembled, 
and to them were gathered many Elves of the Falas and of Nargothrond; and he had great 
strength of Men. Upon the right were stationed the host of Dor-lomin and all the valour 
of Hurin and Huor his brother, and to them had come Haldir of Brethil, their kinsman, 
with many men of the woods. 

Then Fingon looked east and his elven-sight saw far off a dust and the glint of steel like 
stars in a mist, and he knew that Maedhros had set forth; and he rejoiced. Then he looked 
towards Thangorodrim, and there was a dark cloud about it and a black smoke went up; 
and he knew that the wrath of Morgoth was kindled and that their challenge would be 
accepted, and a shadow of doubt fell upon his heart. But at that moment a cry went up, 
passing on the wind from the south from vale to vale, and Elves and Men lifted up their 
voices in wonder and joy. For unsummoned and unlooked-for Turgon had opened the 
leaguer of Gondolin, and was come with an army, ten thousand strong, with bright mail 
and long swords and spears like a forest. Then when Fingon heard afar the great trumpet 
of Turgon, the shadow passed and his heart was uplifted, and he shouted aloud: ’Utulie’n 
aure! Aiya Eldalie ar Atanatarni, utulie’n aure! The day has come! Behold, people of the 
Eldar and Fathers of Men, the day has come!’ And all those who heard his great voice 
echo in the hills answered crying: ’Auta i lome! The night is passing!' 

It was not long before the great battle was joined. For Morgoth knew much of what was 
done and designed by his foes and had laid his plans against the hour of their assault. 
Already a great force out of Angband was drawing near to Hithlum, while another and 
greater went to meet Maedhros to prevent the union of the powers of the kings. And those 



that came against Fingon were clad all in dun raiment and showed no naked steel, and 
thus were already far over the sands of Anfauglith before their approach became known. 


Then the hearts of the Noldor grew hot, and their captains wished to assail their foes on 
the plain; but Fingon spoke against this. 

’Beware of the guile of Morgoth, lords!' he said. 'Ever his strength is more than it seems, 
and his purpose other than he reveals. Do not reveal your own strength, but let the enemy 
spend his first in assault on the hills.' For it was the design of the kings that Maedhros 
should march openly over the Anfauglith with all his strength, of Elves and of Men and 
of Dwarves; and when he had drawn forth, as he hoped, the main annies of Morgoth in 
answer, then Fingon should come on from the West, and so the might of Morgoth should 
be taken as between hammer and anvil and be broken to pieces; and the signal for this 
was to be the firing of a great beacon in Dorthonion. 

But the Captain of Morgoth in the west had been commanded to draw out Fingon from 
his hills by whatever means he could. He marched on, therefore, until the front of his 
battle was drawn up before the stream of Sirion, from the walls of the Barad Eithel to the 
Fen of Serech; and the outposts of Fingon could see the eyes of their enemies. But there 
was no answer to his challenge, and the taunts of his Ores faltered as they looked upon 
the silent walls and the hidden threat of the hills. 

Then the Captain of Morgoth sent out riders with tokens of parley, and they rode up 
before the very walls of the outworks of the Barad Eithel. 

With them they brought Gelrnir son of Guilin, a lord of Nargothrond, whom they had 
captured in the Bragollach, and had blinded; and their heralds showed him forth crying: 
'We have many more such at home, but you must make haste if you would find them. For 
we shall deal with them all when we return, even so.’ And they hewed off Gehnir's arms 
and legs, and left him. 

By ill chance at that point in the outposts stood Gwindor son of Guilin with many folk of 
Nargothrond; and indeed he had marched to war with such strength as he could gather 
because of his grief for the taking of his brother. Now his wrath was like a flame, and he 
leapt forth upon horse-back, and many riders with him, and they pursued the heralds of 
Angband and slew them; and all the folk of Nargothrond followed after, and they drove 
on deep into the ranks of Angband. And seeing this the host of the Noldor was set on fire, 
and Fingon put on his white helm, and sounded his trumpets, and all his host leapt forth 
from the hills in sudden onslaught. 

The light of the drawing of the swords of the Noldor was like a fire in a field of reeds; 
and so fell and swift was their onset that almost the designs of Morgoth went astray. 
Before the decoying army that he had sent west could be strengthened it was swept away 
and destroyed, and the banners of Fingon passed over the Anfauglith and were raised 
before the walls of Angband. 



Ever in the forefront of that battle went Gwindor and the folk of Nargothrond, and even 
now they could not be restrained; and they burst through the outer gates and slew the 
guards within the very courts of Angband; and Morgoth trembled upon his deep throne, 
hearing them beat upon his doors. But Gwindor was trapped there and taken alive and his 
folk slain; for Fingon could not come to his aid. By many secret doors in Thangorodrim 
Morgoth let forth his main strength that he had held in waiting, and Fingon was beaten 
back with great loss from the walls of Angband. 

Then in the plain of the Anfauglith, on the fourth day of the war, there began the Nirnaeth 
Amoediad, all the sorrow of which no tale can contain. Of all that befell in the eastward 
battle: of the routing of Glaurung the Dragon by the Dwarves of Belegost; of the 
treachery of the Easterlings and the overthrow of the host of Maedhros and the flight of 
the sons of Feanor, no more is here said. In the west the host of Fingon retreated over the 
sands, and there fell Haldir son of Halrnir and most of the Men of Brethil. But on the fifth 
day as night fell, and they were still far from Ered Wethrin, the armies of Angband 
surrounded the anny of Fingon, and they fought until day, pressed ever closer. In the 
morning came hope, for the horns of Turgon were heard, as he marched up with the main 
host of Gondolin; for Turgon had been stationed southward guarding the passes of Sirion, 
and he had restrained most of his folk from the rash onslaught. Now he hastened to the 
aid of his brother; and the Noldor of Gondolin were strong and their ri nk s shone like a 
river of steel in the sun, for the sword and harness of the least of the warriors of Turgon 
was worth more than the ransom of any king among Men. 

Now the phalanx of the guard of the King broke through the ranks of the Ores, and 
Turgon hewed his way to the side of his brother. And it is said that the meeting of Turgon 
with Hurin who stood beside Fingon was glad in the midst of the battle. For a while then 
the hosts of Angband were driven back, and Fingon again began his retreat. But having 
routed Maedhros in the east Morgoth had now great forces to spare, and before Fingon 
and Turgon could come to the shelter of the hills they were assailed by a tide of foes 
thrice greater than all the force that was left to them. Gothmog, high-captain of Angband, 
was come; and he drove a dark wedge between the Elven-hosts, surrounding King 
Fingon, and thrusting Turgon and Hurin aside towards the Fen of Serech. Then he turned 
upon Fingon. That was a grim meeting. At last Fingon stood alone with his guard dead 
about him, and he fought with Gothmog, until a Balrog came behind him and cast a thong 
of steel round him. Then Gothmog hewed him with his black axe, and a white flame 
sprang up from the helm of Fingon as it was cloven. Thus fell the King of the Noldor; 
and they beat him into the dust with their maces, and his banner, blue and silver, they trod 
into the mire of his blood. 

The field was lost; but still Hurin and Huor and the remnant of the House of Hador stood 
firm with Turgon of Gondolin; and the hosts of Morgoth could not yet win the passes of 
Sirion. Then Hurin spoke to Turgon, saying: ’Go now, lord, while time is! For you are the 
last of the House of Fingolfin, and in you lives the last hope of the Eldar. 


While Gondolin stands Morgoth shall still know fear in his heart.' 



’Not long now can Gondolin remain hidden, and being discovered it must fall,' said 
Turgon. 


'Yet if it stands only a little while,' said Huor, 'then out of your house shall come the hope 
of Elves and Men. This I say to you, lord, with the eyes of death: though we part here for 
ever, and I shall not look on your white walls again, from you and from me a new star 
shall arise. Farewell!' 

Maeglin, Turgon’s sister-son, who stood by, heard these words and did not forget them. 

Then Turgon took the counsel of Hurin and Huor, and he gave orders that his host should 
begin a retreat into the passes of Sirion; and his captains Ecthelion and Glorfindel 
guarded the flanks to right and left so that none of the enemy should pass them by, for the 
only road in that region was narrow and ran near the west bank of the growing stream of 
Sirion. But the Men of Dor-lomin held the rearguard, as Hurin and Huor desired; for they 
did not wish in their hearts to escape from the Northlands; and if they could not win back 
to their homes, there they would stand to the end. So it was that Turgon fought his way 
southward, until coming behind the guard of Hurin and Huor, he passed down Sirion and 
escaped; and he vanished into the mountains and was hidden from the eyes of Morgoth. 
But the brothers drew the remnant of the mighty men of the House of Hador about them, 
and foot by foot they withdrew, until they came behind the Fen of Serech, and had the 
stream of Rivil before them. There they stood and gave way no more. 

Then all the hosts of Angband swarmed against them, and they bridged the stream with 
their dead, and encircled the remnant of Hithlum as a gathering tide about a rock. There, 
as the Sun westered and the shadows of the Ered Wethrin grew dark, Huor fell pierced 
with a venomed arrow in the eye, and all the valiant men of Hador were slain about him 
in a heap; and the Ores hewed their heads and piled them as a mound of gold in the 
sunset. 

Last of all Hurin stood alone. Then he cast aside his shield, and seized the axe of an orc- 
captain and wielded it two-handed; and it is sung that the axe smoked in the black blood 
of the troll-guard of Gothmog until it withered, and each time that he slew Hurin cried 
aloud: 'Aure entuluva! 

Day shall come again!' Seventy times he uttered that cry; but they took him at last alive, 
by the command of Morgoth, who thought thus to do him more evil than by death. 
Therefore the Ores grappled Hurin with their hands, which clung to him still, though he 
hewed off their arms; and ever their numbers were renewed, till he fell buried beneath 
them. Then Gothmog bound him and dragged him to Angband with mockery. 

Thus ended the Nimaeth Arnoediad, as the Sun went down beyond the Sea. 

Night fell in Hithlum, and there came a great stonn of wind out of the West. 



Great was the triumph of Morgoth, though all the purposes of his malice were not yet 
accomplished. One thought troubled him deeply and marred his victory with unquiet: 
Turgon had escaped his net, of all his foes the one whom he had most desired to take or 
destroy. For Turgon of the great House of Fingolfin was now by right King of all the 
Noldor; and Morgoth feared and hated the House of Fingolfin, because they had scorned 
him in Valinor and had the friendship of Ulmo his foe; and because of the wounds that 
Fingolfin gave him in battle. And most of all Morgoth feared Turgon, for of old in 
Valinor his eye had lighted on him, and whenever he drew near a dark shadow had fallen 
on his spirit, foreboding that in some time that yet lay hidden in doom, from Turgon ruin 
should come to him. 



CHAPTER III 


THE WORDS OF HURIN AND MORGOTH 


Now by the command of Morgoth the Ores with great labour gathered all the bodies of 
their enemies, and all their harness and weapons, and piled them in a mound in the midst 
of the plain of Anfauglith, and it was like a great hill that could be seen from afar, and the 
Eldar named it Haudh-en-Nirnaeth. But grass came there and grew again long and green 
upon that hill alone in all the desert; and no servant of Morgoth thereafter trod upon the 
earth beneath which the swords of the Eldar and the Edain crumbled into rust. The realm 
of Fingon was no more, and the Sons of Feanor wandered as leaves before the wind. To 
Hithlum none of the Men of Hador's House returned, nor any tidings of the battle and the 
fate of their lords. But Morgoth sent thither Men who were under his dominion, swarthy 
Easterlings; and he shut them in that land and forbade them to leave it. This was all that 
he gave them of the rich rewards that he had promised them for their treachery to 
Maedhros: to plunder and harass the old and the children and womenfolk of Hador's 
people. The remnant of the Eldar of Hithlum, all those who did not escape into the wilds 
and the mountains, he took to the mines of Angband and they became his thralls. But the 
Ores went freely through all the North and pressed ever southward into Beleriand. There 
Doriath yet remained, and Nargothrond; but Morgoth gave little heed to them, either 
because he knew little of them, or because their hour was not yet come in the designs of 
his malice. But his thought ever returned to Turgon. 

Therefore Hurin was brought before Morgoth, for Morgoth knew by his arts and his spies 
that Hurin had the friendship of the King; and he sought to daunt him with his eyes. But 
Hurin could not yet be daunted, and he defied Morgoth. Therefore Morgoth had him 
chained and set in slow torment; but after a while he came to him, and offered him his 
choice to go free whither he would, or to receive power and rank as the greatest of 
Morgoth's captains, if he would but reveal where Turgon had his stronghold, and aught 
else that he knew of the King's counsels. But Hurin the Steadfast mocked him, saying: 
'Blind you are, Morgoth Bauglir, and blind shall ever be, seeing only the dark. You know 
not what rules the hearts of Men, and if you knew you could not give it. But a fool is he 
who accepts what Morgoth offers. You will take first the price and then withhold the 
promise; and I should get only death, if I told you what you ask.’ 

Then Morgoth laughed, and he said: 'Death you may yet crave of me as a boon.’ Then he 
took Hurin to the Haudh-en-Nirnaeth, and it was then new-built and the reek of death was 
upon it; and Morgoth set Hurin upon its top and bade him look west towards Hithlum, 
and think of his wife and his son and other kin. 'For they dwell now in my realm,’ said 
Morgoth, 'and they are at my mercy.' 



'You have none,' answered Hurin. 'But you will not come at Turgon through them; for 
they do not know his secrets.’ 


Then wrath mastered Morgoth, and he said: 'Yet I may come at you, and all your 
accursed house; and you shall be broken on my will, though you all were made of steel.’ 
And he took up a long sword that lay there and broke it before the eyes of Hurin, and a 
splinter wounded his face; but Hurin did not blench. Then Morgoth stretching out his 
long arm towards Dor-lomin cursed Hurin and Morwen and their offspring, saying: 
'Behold! 

The shadow of my thought shall lie upon them wherever they go, and my hate shall 
pursue them to the ends of the world.’ 

But Hurin said: 'You speak in vain. For you cannot see them, nor govern them from afar: 
ndt while you keep this shape, and desire still to be a King visible on earth.’ 

Then Morgoth turned upon Hurin, and he said: 'Fool, little among Men, and they are the 
least of all that speak! Have you seen the Valar, or measured the power of Manwe and 
Varda? Do you know the reach of their thought? Or do you think, perhaps, that their 
thought is upon you, and that they may shield you from afar?' 

'I know not,' said Hurin. 'Yet so it might be, if they willed. For the Elder King shall not be 
dethroned while Arda endures.' 

'You say it,' said Morgoth. 'I am the Elder King: Melkor, first and mightiest of all the 
Valar, who was before the world, and made it. The shadow of my purpose lies upon 
Arda, and all that is in it bends slowly and surely to my will. But upon all whom you love 
my thought shall weigh as a cloud of Doom, and it shall bring them down into darkness 
and despair. Wherever they go, evil shall arise. Whenever they speak, their words shall 
bring ill counsel. Whatsoever they do shall turn against them. They shall die without 
hope, cursing both life and death.’ 

But Hurin answered: 'Do you forget to whom you speak? Such things you spoke long ago 
to our fathers; but we escaped from your shadow. And now we have knowledge of you, 
for we have looked on the faces that have seen the Light, and heard the voices that have 
spoken with Manwe. Before Arda you were, but others also; and you did not make it. 
Neither are you the most mighty; for you have spent your strength upon yourself and 
wasted it in your own emptiness. No more are you now than an escaped thrall of the 
Valar, and their chain still awaits you.’ 

'You have learned the lessons of your masters by rote,' said Morgoth. 

'But such childish lore will not help you, now they are all fled away.' 

'This last then I will say to you, thrall Morgoth,' said Hurin, 'and it comes not from the 
lore of the Eldar, but is put into my heart in this hour. You; are not the Lord of Men, and 



shall not be, though all Aida and Menel fall in your dominion. Beyond the Circles of the 
World you shall not pursue those who refuse you.’ 

’Beyond the Circles of the World I will not pursue them,’ said Morgoth. 

'For beyond the Circles of the World there is Nothing. But within them they shall not 
escape me, until they enter into Nothing.’ 

'You lie,' said Hurin. 

'You shall see and you shall confess that I do not lie,' said Morgoth. 

And taking Hurin back to Angband he set him in a chair of stone upon a high place of 
Thangorodrim, from which he could see afar the land of Hithlum in the west and the 
lands of Beleriand in the south. There he was bound by the power of Morgoth; and 
Morgoth standing beside him cursed him again and set his power upon him, so that he 
could not move from that place, nor die, until Morgoth should release him. 

'Sit now there,' said Morgoth, 'and look out upon the lands where evil and despair shall 
come upon those whom you have delivered to me. For you have dared to mock me, and 
have questioned the power of Melkor, Master of the fates of Arda. Therefore with my 
eyes you shall see, and with my ears you shall hear, and nothing shall be hidden from 
you.' 



CHAPTER IV 


THE DEPARTURE OF TURIN 


To Brethil three men only found their way back at last through Taur-nu-Fuin, an evil 
road; and when Gloredhel Hador's daughter learned of the fall of Haldir she grieved and 
died. 

To Dor-lomin no tidings came. Rian wife of Huor fled into the wild distraught; but she 
was aided by the Grey-elves of Mithrim, and when her child, Tuor, was born they 
fostered him. But Rian went to the Haudh-en-Nimaeth, and laid herself down there, and 
died. 

Morwen Eledhwen remained in Hithlum, silent in grief. Her son Turin was only in his 
ninth year, and she was again with child. Her days were evil. The Easterlings came into 
the land in great numbers and they dealt cruelly with the people of Hador, and robbed 
them of all that they possessed and enslaved them. All the people of Hurin's homelands 
that could work or serve any purpose they took away, even young girls and boys, and the 
old they killed or drove out to starve. But they dared not yet lay hands on the Lady of 
Dor-lomin, or thrust her from her house; for the word ran among them that she was 
perilous, and a witch who had dealings with the white-fiends: for so they named the 
Elves, hating them, but fearing them more. For this reason they also feared and avoided 
the mountains, in which many of the Eldar had taken refuge, especially in the south of the 
land; and after plundering and harrying the Easterlings drew back northwards. For 
Hurin's house stood in the south-east of Dor-lomin, and the mountains were near; Nen 
Lalaith indeed came down from a spring under the shadow of Amon Darthir, over whose 
shoulder there was a steep pass. By this the hardy could cross Ered Wethrin and come 
down by the wells of Glithui into Beleriand. But this was not known to the Easteriings, 
nor to Morgoth yet; for all that country, while the House of Fingolfin stood, was secure 
from him, and none of his servants had ever come there. He trusted that Ered Wethrin 
was a wall insurmountable, both against escape from the north and against assault from 
the south; and there was indeed no other pass, for the unwinged, between Serech and far 
westward where Dor-lomin marched with Nevrast. 

Thus it came to pass that after the first inroads Morwen was let be, though there were 
men that lurked in the woods about and it was perilous to stir far abroad. There still 
remained under Mprwen's shelter Sador the woodwright and a few old men and women, 
and Turin, whom she kept close within the garth. But the homestead of Hurin soon fell 
into decay, and though Morwen laboured hard she was poor, and would have gone 
hungry but for the help that was sent to her secretly by Aerin, Hurin's kinswoman; for a 
certain Brodda, one of the Easterlings, had taken her by force to be his wife. Alms were 
bitter to Morwen; but she took this aid for the sake of Turin and her unborn child, and 



because, as she said, it came of her own. For it was this Brodda who had seized the 
people, the goods, and the cattle of Hurin's homelands, and carried them off to his own 
dwellings. He was a bold man, but of small account among his own people before they 
came to Hithlum; and so, seeking wealth, he was ready to hold lands that others of his 
sort did not covet. Morwen he had seen once, when he rode to her house on a foray; but a 
great dread of her had seized him. He thought that he had looked in the fell eyes of a 
white-fiend, and he was filled with a mortal fear lest some evil should overtake him; and 
he did not ransack her house, nor discover Turin, else the life of the heir of the true lord 
would have been short. 

Brodda made thralls of the Strawheads, as he named the people of Hador, and set them to 
build him a wooden hall in the land to the northward of Hurin's house; and within a 
stockade his slaves were herded like cattle in a byre, but ill guarded. Among them some 
could still be found uncowed and ready to help the Lady of Dor-lomin, even at their peril; 
and from them came secretly tidings of the land to Morwen, though there was little hope 
in the news they brought. But Brodda took Aerin as a wife and not a slave, for there were 
few women amongst his own following, and none to compare with the daughters of the 
Edain; and he hoped to make himself a lordship in that country, and have an heir to hold 
it after him. 

Of what had happened and of what might happen in the days to come Morwen said little 
to Turin; and he feared to break her silence with questions. 

When the East-erlings first came into Dor-lomin he said to his mother: 'When will my 
father come back, to cast out these ugly thieves? Why does he not come?' 

Morwen answered: 'I do not know. It may be that he was slain, or that he is held captive; 
or again it may be that he was driven far away, and cannot yet return through the foes that 
surround us.’ 

'Then I think that he is dead,' said Turin, and before his mother he restrained his tears; 'for 
no one could keep him from coming back to help us, i he were alive.’ 

'I do not think that either of those things are true, my son,' said Morwen. 

As the time lengthened the heart of Morwen grew darker for her son Turin, heir of Dor- 
lomin and Ladros; for she could see no hope for him better than to become a slave of the 
Easterling men, before he was much older. Therefore she remembered her words with 
Hurin, and her thought turned again to Doriath; and she resolved at last to send Turin 
away in secret, if she could, and to beg King Thingol to harbour him. And as she sat and 
pondered how this might be done, she heard clearly in her thought the voice of Hurin 
saying to her: Go swiftly! Do not wait for me! But the birth of her child was drawing 
near, and the road would be hard and perilous; the more that went the less hope of escape. 
And her heart still cheated her with hope unadmitted; her inmost thought foreboded that 
Hurin was not dead, and she listened for his footfall in the sleepless watches of the night, 
or would wake thinking that she had heard in the courtyard the neigh of Arroch his horse. 



Moreover, though she was willing that her son should be fostered in the halls of another, 
after the manner of that time, she would not yet humble her pride to be an alms-guest, not 
even of a king. 

Therefore the voice of Hurin, or the memory of his voice, was denied, and the first strand 
of the fate of Turin was woven. 

Autumn of the Year of Lamentation was drawing on before Morwen came to this resolve, 
and then she was in haste; for the time for journeying was short, but she dreaded that 
Turin would be taken, if she waited over winter. Easterlings were prowling round the 
garth and spying on the house. Therefore she said suddenly to Turin: 'Your father does 
not come. 

So you must go, and soon. It is as he would wish.’ 

'Go?' cried Turin. 'Whither shall we go? Over the Mountains?' 

'Yes,' said Morwen, 'over the Mountains, away south. South - that way some hope may 
he. But I did not say we, my son. You must go, but I must stay.' 

'I cannot go alone!' said Turin. 'I will not leave you. Why should we not go together?’ 

'I cannot go,' said Morwen. 'But you will not go alone. I shall send Gethron with you, and 
Grithnir too, perhaps.' 

'Will you not send Labadal?' said Turin. 

'No, for Sador is lame,' said Morwen, 'and it will be a hard road. And since you are my 
son and the days are grim, I will not speak softly: you may die on that road. The year is 
getting late. But if you stay, you will come to a worse end: to be a thrall. If you wish to be 
a man, when you come to a man’s age, you will do as I bid, bravely.' 

'But I shall leave you only with Sador, and blind Ragnir, and the old women,' said Turin. 
'Did not my father say that I am the heir of Hador? 

The heir should stay in Hador's house to defend it. Now I wish that I still had my knife!’ 

'The heir should stay, but he cannot,' said Morwen. 'But he may return one day. Now take 
heart! I will follow you, if things grow worse; if I can.’ 

'But how will you find me, lost in the wild? said Turin; and suddenly his heart failed him, 
and he wept openly. 


'If you wail, other things will* find you first,' said Morwen. 'But I know whither you are 
going, and if you come there, and if you remain there, there I will find you, if I can. For I 



am sending you to King Thingol in Doriath. Would you not rather be a king's guest than a 
thrall?' 


'I do not know,' said Turin. 'I do not know what a thrall is.’ 

'I am sending you away so that you need not learn it,' Morwen answered. 

Then she set Turin before her and looked into his eyes, as if she were trying to read some 
riddle there. 'It is hard, Turin, my son,' she said at length. 'Not hard for you only. It is 
heavy on me in evil days to judge what is best to do. But I do as I think right; for why 
else should I part with the thing most dear that is left to me?' 

They spoke no more of this together, and Turin was grieved and bewildered. In the 
morning he went to find Sador, who had been hewing sticks for firing, of which they had 
little, for they dared not stray out in the woods; and now he leant on his crutch and looked 
at the great chair of Hurin, which had been thrust unfinished in a corner. 'It must go,' he 
said, 'for only bare needs can be served in these days.' 

'Do not break it yet,' said Turin. 'Maybe he will come home, and then it will please him to 
see what you have done for him while he was away.' 

'False hopes are more dangerous than fears,' said Sador, 'and they will not keep us wann 
this winter.' He fingered the carving on the chair, and sighed. 'I wasted my time,’ he said, 
'though the hours seemed pleasant. 

But all such things are short-lived; and the joy in the making is their only true end, I 
guess. And now I might as well give you back your gift.’ 

Turin put out his hand, and quickly withdrew it. 'A man does not take back his gifts,' he 
said. 

'But if it is my own, may I not give it as I will?' said Sador. 

'Yes,' said Turin, 'to any man but me. But why should you wish to give it?' 

'I have no hope of using it for worthy tasks,' Sador said. 'There will be no work for 
Labadal in days to come but thrall-work.' 

'What is a thrall?' said Turin. 

'A man who was a man but is treated as a beast,' Sador answered. 'Fed only to keep alive, 
kept alive only to toil, toiling only for fear of pain or death. And from these robbers he 
may get pain or death just for their sport. I hear that they pick some of the fleet-footed 
and hunt them with hounds. They have learned quicker from the Ores than we leamt from 
the Fair Folk.' 



’Now I understand things better,' said Turin. 


'It is a shame that you should have to understand such things so soon,’ said Sador; then 
seeing the strange look on Turin's face: 'What do you understand now?' 

'Why my mother is sending me away,' said Turin, and tears filled his eyes. 

'Ah!' said Sador, and he muttered to himself: 'But why so long delayed?’ 

Then turning to Turin he said: 'That does not seem news for tears to me. 

But you should not speak your mother's counsels aloud to Labadal, or to anyone. All 
walls and fences have ears these days, ears that do not grow on fair heads.’ 

'But I must speak with someone!' said Turin. 'I have always told things to you. I do not 
want to leave you, Labadal. I do not want to leave this house or my mother.' 

'But if you do not,' said Sador, 'soon there will be an end of the House of Hador for ever, 
as you must understand now. Labadal does not want you to go; but Sador servant of 
Hurin will be happier when Hurin's son is out of the reach of the Easterlings. Well, well, 
it cannot be helped: we must say farewell. Now will you not take my knife as a parting 
gift?’ 


'No!' said Turin. 'I am going to the Elves, to the King of Doriath, my mother says. There I 
may get other things like it. But I shall not be able to send you any gifts, Labadal. I shall 
be far away and all alone.’ 

Then Turin wept; but Sador said to him: 'Hey now! Where is Hurin's son? 

For I heard him say, not long ago: I shall go as a soldier with an Elf-king, as soon as I am 
able.’ 

Then Turin stayed his tears, and he said: 'Very well: if those were the words of the son of 
Hurin, he must keep them, and go. But whenever I say that I will do this or that, it looks 
very different when the time conies. Now I am unwilling. I must take care not to say such 
things again.’ 

'It would be best indeed,’ said Sador. 'So most men teach, and few men learn. Let the 
unseen days be. Today is more than enough.’ 

Now Turin was made ready for the journey, and he bade farewell to his mother, and 
departed in secret with his two companions. But when they bade Turin turn and look back 
upon the house of his father, then the anguish of parting smote him like a sword, and he 
cried: 'Morwen, Morwen, when shall I see you again?’ But Morwen standing on her 
threshold heard the echo of that cry in the wooded hills, and she clutched the post of the 
door so that her lingers were torn. This was the first of the sorrows of Turin. 



Early in the year after Turin was gone Morwen gave birth to her child, and she named her 
Nienor, which is Mourning; but Turin was already far away when she was bom. Long 
and evil was his road, for the power of Morgoth was ranging far abroad; but he had as 
guides Gethron and Grithnir, who had been young in the days of Hador, and though they 
were now aged they were valiant, and they knew well the lands, for they had journeyed 
often through Beleriand in former times. Thus by fate and courage they passed over the 
Shadowy Mountains, and coming down into the Vale of Sirion they passed into the 
Forest of Brethil; and at last, weary and haggard, they reached the confines of Doriath. 
But there they became bewildered, and were enmeshed in the mazes of the Queen, and 
wandered lost amid the pathless trees, until all their food was spent. 

There they came near to death, for winter came cold from the North; but not so light was 
Turin's doom. Even as they lay in despair they heard a horn sounded. Beleg the Strong- 
bow was hunting in that region, for he dwelt ever on the marches of Doriath, and he was 
the greatest woodsman of those days. He heard their cries and came to them, and when he 
had given them food and drink he learned their names and whence they came, and he was 
fdled with wonder and pity. And he looked with liking upon Turin, for he had the beauty 
of his mother and the eyes of his father, and he was sturdy and strong. 

'What boon would you have of King Thingol?' said Beleg to the boy. 

'I would be one of his knights, to ride against Morgoth, and avenge my father,' said Turin. 

'That may well be, when the years have increased you,' said Beleg. 'For though you are 
yet small you have the makings of a valiant man, worthy to be a son of Hurin the 
Steadfast, if that were possible.’ For the name of Hurin was held in honour in all the lands 
of the Elves. Therefore Beleg gladly became the guide of the wanderers, and he led them 
to a lodge where he dwelt at that time with other hunters, and there they were housed 
while a messenger went to Menegroth. And when word came back that Thingol and 
Melian would receive the son of Hurin and his guardians, Beleg led them by secret ways 
into the Hidden Kingdom. 

Thus Turin came to the great bridge over the Esgalduin, and passed the gates of Thingol's 
halls; and as a child he gazed upon the marvels of Menegroth, which no mortal Man 
before had seen, save Beren only. Then Gethron spoke the message of Morwen before 
Thingol and Melian; and Thingol received them kindly, and set Turin upon his knee in 
honour of Hurin, mightiest of Men, and of Beren his kinsman. And those that saw this 
marvelled, for it was a sign that Thingol took Turin as his foster-son; and that was not at 
that time done by kings, nor ever again by Elf-lord to a Man. Then Thingol said to him: 
'Here, son of Hurin, shall your home be; and in all your life you shall be held as my son, 
Man though you be. Wisdom shall be given you beyond the measure of mortal Men, and 
the weapons of the Elves shall be set in your hands. 

Perhaps the time may come when you shall regain the lands of your father in Hithlum; 
but dwell now here in love.’ 



Thus began the sojourn of Turin in Doriath. With him remained for a while Gethron and 
Grithnir his guardians, though they yearned to return again to their lady in Dor-lomin. 
Then age and sickness came upon Grithnir, and he stayed beside Turin until he died; but 
Gethron departed, and Thingol sent with him an escort to guide him and guard him, and 
they brought words from Thingol to Morwen. They came at last to Hurin's house, and 
when Morwen learned that Turin was received with honour in the halls of Thingol her 
grief was lightened; and the Elves brought also rich gifts from Melian, and a message 
bidding her return with Thingol's folk to Doriath. For Melian was wise and foresighted, 
and she hoped thus to avert the evil that was prepared in the thought of Morgoth. But 
Morwen would not depart from her house, for her heart was yet unchanged and her pride 
still high; moreover Nienor was a babe in arms. 

Therefore she dismissed the Elves of Doriath with her thanks, and gave them in gift the 
last small things of gold that remained to her, concealing her poverty; and she bade them 
take back to Thingol the Helm of Hador. But Turin watched ever for the return of 
Thingol's messengers; and when they came back alone he fled into the woods and wept, 
for he knew of Melian's bidding and he had hoped that Morwen would come. This was 
the second sorrow of Turin. When the messengers spoke Morwen's answer, Melian was 
moved with pity, perceiving her mind; and she saw that the fate which she foreboded 
could not lightly be set aside. 

The Helm of Hador was given into Thingol's hands. That helm was made of grey steel 
adorned with gold, and on it were graven runes of victory. A power was in it that guarded 
any who wore it from wound or death, for the sword that hewed it was broken, and the 
dart that smote it sprang aside. It was wrought by Telchar, the smith of Nogrod, whose 
works were renowned. It had a visor (after the manner of those that the Dwarves used in 
their forges for the shielding of their eyes), and the face of one that wore it struck fear 
into the hearts of all beholders, but was itself guarded from dart and fire. Upon its crest 
was set in defiance a gilded image of Glaurung the dragon; for it had been made soon 
after he first issued from the gates of Morgoth. Often Hador, and Galdor after him, had 
borne it in war; and the hearts of the host of Hithlum were uplifted when they saw it 
towering high amid the battle, and they cried: 'Of more worth is the Dragon of Dor-lomin 
than the gold- worm of Angband!’ But Hurin did not wear the Dragon-helm with ease, and 
in any case he would not use it, for he said: 'I would rather look on my foes with my true 
face.’ Nonetheless he accounted the helm among the greatest heirlooms of his house. 

Now Thingol had in Menegroth deep armouries filled with great wealth of weapons: 
metal wrought like fishes’ mail and shining like water in the moon; swords and axes, 
shields and helms, wrought by Telchar himself or by his master Gamil Zirak the old, or 
by elven- wrights more skilful still. For some things he had received in gift that came out 
of Valinor and were wrought by Feanor in his mastery, than whom no craftsman was 
greater in all the days of the world. Yet Thingol handled the Helm of Hador as though his 
hoard were scanty, and he spoke courteous words, saying: 'Proud were the head that bore 
this helm, which the sires of Hurin bore.' 



Then a thought came to him, and he summoned Turin, and told him that Morwen had sent 
to her son a mighty thing, the heirloom of his fathers. 


’Take now the Dragonhead of the North,' he said, 'and when the time comes wear it well.’ 
But Turin was yet too young to lift the helm, and he heeded it not because of the sorrow 
of his heart. 



CHAPTER V 


TURIN IN DORIATH 


In the years of his childhood in the kingdom of Doriath Turin was watched over by 
Melian, though he saw her seldom. But there was a maiden named Nellas, who lived in 
the woods; and at Melian's bidding she would follow Turin if he strayed in the forest, and 
often she met him there, as it were by chance. Then they played together, or walked hand 
in hand; for he grew swiftly, whereas she seemed no more than a maiden of his own age, 
and was so in heart for all her elven-years. From Nellas Turin learned much concerning 
the ways and the wild things of Doriath, and she taught him to speak the Sindarin tongue 
after the manner of the ancient realm, older, and more courteous, and richer in beautiful 
words. Thus for a little while his mood was lightened, until he fell again under shadow, 
and that friendship passed like a morning of spring. For Nellas did not go to Menegroth, 
and was unwilling ever to walk under roofs of stone; so that as Turin's boyhood passed 
and he turned his thoughts to deeds of men, he saw her less and less often, and at last 
called for her no more. But she watched over him still, though now she remained hidden. 

Nine years Turin dwelt in the halls of Menegroth. His heart and thought turned ever to his 
own kin, and at times he had tidings of them for his own comfort. For Thingol sent 
messengers to Morwen as often as he might, and she sent back words for her son; thus 
Turin heard that Morwen's plight was eased, and that his sister Nienor grew in beauty, a 
flower in the grey North. And Turin grew in stature until he became tall among Men and 
surpassed that of the Elves of Doriath, and his strength and hardihood were renowned in 
the realm of Thingol. In those years he learned much lore, hearing eagerly the histories of 
ancient days and great deeds of old, and he became thoughtful, and sparing in speech. 

Often Beleg Strongbow came to Menegroth to seek him, and led him far afield, teaching 
him woodcraft and archery and (which he liked more) the handling of swords; but in 
crafts of making he had less skill, for he was slow to learn his own strength, and often 
marred what he made with some sudden stroke. In other matters also it seemed that 
fortune was unfriendly to him, so that often what he designed went awry, and what he 
desired he did not gain; neither did he win friendship easily, for he was not merry, and 
laughed seldom, and a shadow lay on his youth. Nonetheless he was held in love and 
esteem by those who knew him well, and he had honour as the fosterling of the King. 

Yet there was one in Doriath that begrudged him this, and ever the more as Turin drew 
nearer to manhood: Saeros was his name. He was proud, dealing haughtily with those 
whom he deemed of lesser state and worth than himself. He became a friend of Daeron 
the minstrel, for he also was skilled in song; and he had no love for Men, and least of all 
for any kinsman of Beren One-hand. 'Is it not strange,' said he, 'that this land should be 
opened to yet another of this unhappy race? Did not the other do hann enough in 



Doriath?' Therefore he looked askance at Turin and on all that he did, saying what ill he 
could of it; but his words were cunning and his malice veiled. If he met with Turin alone, 
he spoke haughtily to him and showed plain his contempt; and Turin grew weary of him, 
though for long he returned ill words with silence, for Saeros was great among the people 
of Doriath and a counsellor of the King. But the silence of Turin displeased Saeros as 
much as his words. 

In the year that Turin was seventeen years old, his grief was renewed; for all tidings from 
his home ceased at that time. The power of Morgoth had grown yearly, and all Hithlum 
was now under his shadow. Doubtless he knew much of the doings of Hurin’s people and 
kin, and had not molested them for a while, so that his design might be fulfilled; but now 
in pursuit of this purpose he set a close watch on all the passed of the Shadowy 
Mountains, so that none might come out of Hithlum nor enter it, save at great peril, and 
the Ores swanned about the sources of Narog and Teiglin and the upper waters of Sirion. 
Thus there came a time when the messengers of Thingol did not return, and he would 
send no more. He was ever loath to let any stray beyond the guarded borders, and in 
nothing had he shown greater good will to Hurin and his kin than in sending his people 
on the dangerous roads to Morwen in Dor-lomin. 

Now Turin grew heavy-hearted, not knowing what new evil was afoot, and fearing that 
an ill fate had befallen Morwen and Nienor; and for many days he sat silent, brooding on 
the downfall of the House of Hador and the Men of the North. Then he rose up and went 
to seek Thingol; and he found him sitting with Melian under Hirilom, the great beech of 
Menegroth. 

Thingol looked on Turin in wonder, seeing suddenly before him in the place of his 
fosterling a Man and a stranger, tall, dark-haired, looking at him with deep eyes in a 
white face, stern and proud; but he did not speak. 

’What do you desire, foster-son?’ said Thingol, and guessed that he would ask for nothing 
small. 

’Mail, sword, and shield of my stature, lord,’ answered Turin. ’Also by your leave I will 
now reclaim the Dragon-helm of my sires.’ 

’These you shall have,’ said Thingol. ’But what need have you yet of such arms?’ 

’The need of a man,’ said Turin; ’and of a son who has kin to remember. 

And I need also companions valiant in arms.’ 

’I will appoint you a place among my knights of the sword, for the sword will ever be 
your weapon,’ said Thingol. ’With them you may make trial of war upon the marches, if 
that is your desire.’ 



’Beyond the marches of Doriath my heart urges me,' said Turin. 'For onset against our foe 
I long, rather than defence.’ 


'Then you must go alone,' said Thingol. 'The part of my people in the war with Angband I 
rule according to my wisdom, Turin son of Hurin. No force of the arms of Doriath will I 
send out at this time; nor at any time that I can yet foresee.’ 

'Yet you are free to go as you will, son of Morwen,' said Melian. 'The Girdle of Melian 
does not hinder the going of those that passed in with our leave.’ 

'Unless wise counsel will restrain you,' said Thingol. 

'What is your counsel, lord?' said Turin. 

'A Man you seem in stature, and indeed more than many already,' Thingol answered; 'but 
nonetheless you have not come to the fullness of your manhood that shall be. Until that is 
achieved, you should be patient, testing and training your strength. Then, maybe, you can 
remember your kin; but there is little hope that one Man alone can do more against the 
Dark Lord than to aid the Elf-lords in their defence, as long as that may last.' 

Then Turin said: 'Beren my kinsman did more.’ 

'Beren, and Luthien,' said Melian. 'But you are overbold to speak so to the father of 
Luthien. Not so high is your destiny, I think, Turin son of Morwen, though greatness is in 
you, and your fate is twined with that of the Elven-folk, for good or for ill. Beware of 
yourself, lest it be ill.' Then after a silence she spoke to him again, saying: 'Go now, 
fosterson; and take the advice of the King. That will ever be wiser than your own counsel. 
Yet I do not think that you will long abide with us in Doriath beyond the coming of 
manhood. If in days to come you remember the words of Melian, it will be for your good: 
fear both the heat and the cold of your heart, and strive for patience, if you can.’ 

Then Turin bowed before them, and took his leave. And soon after he put on the Dragon- 
helm, and took arms, and went away to the north-marches, and was joined to the elven- 
warriors who there waged unceasing war upon the Ores and all servants and creatures of 
Morgoth. Thus while yet scarcely out of his boyhood his strength and courage were 
proved; and remembering the wrongs of his kin he was ever forward in deeds of daring, 
and he received many wounds by spear or arrow or the crooked blades of the Ores. 

But his doom delivered him from death; and word ran through the woods, and was heard 
far beyond Doriath, that the Dragon-helm of Dor-lomin was seen again. Then many 
wondered, saying: 'Can the spirit of any man return from death; or has Hurin of Hithlum 
escaped indeed from the pits of Hell?' 

One only was mightier in arms among the march-wardens of Thingol at that time than 
Turin, and that was Beleg Strongbow; and Beleg and Turin were companions in every 
peril, and walked far and wide in the wild woods together. 



Thus three years passed, and in that time Turin came seldom to Thingol's halls; and he 
cared no longer for his looks or his attire, but his hair was unkempt, and his mail covered 
with a grey cloak stained with the weather. But it chanced in the third summer after 
Turin's departure, when he was twenty years old, that desiring rest and needing 
smithwork for the repair of his anns he came unlooked for to Menegroth, and went one 
evening into the hall. Thingol was not there, for he was abroad in the greenwood with 
Melian, as was his delight at times in the high summer. Turin took a seat without heed, 
for he was wayworn, and filled with thought; and by ill-luck he set himself at a board 
among the elders of the realm, and in that place where Saeros was accustomed to sit. 

Saeros, entering late, was angered, believing that Turin had done this in pride, and with 
intent to affront him; and his anger was not lessened to find that Turin was not rebuked 
by those that sat there, but was welcomed as one worthy to sit among them. 

For a while therefore Saeros feigned to be of like mind, and took another seat, facing 
Turin across the board. 

'Seldom does the march-warden favour us with his company,’ he said; ’and I gladly yield 
my accustomed seat for the chance of speech with him.’ 

But Turin, who was in converse with Mablung the Hunter, did not rise, and said only a 
curt ’I thank you’. 

Saeros then plied him with questions, concerning the news from the borders, and his 
deeds in the wild; but though his words seemed fair, the mockery in his voice could not 
be mistaken. Then Turin became weary, and he looked about him, and knew the 
bitterness of exile; and for all the light and laughter of the Elven-halls his thought turned 
to Beleg and their life in the woods, and thence far away, to Morwen in Dor-lomin in the 
house of his father; and he frowned, because of the darkness of his thoughts, and made no 
answer to Saeros. At this, believing the frown aimed at himself, Saeros restrained his 
anger no longer; and he took out a golden comb, and cast it on the board before Turin, 
crying: ’Doubtless, Man of Hithlum, you came in haste to this table, and may be excused 
your ragged cloak; but there is no need to leave your head untended as a thicket of 
brambles. And maybe if your ears were uncovered you would heed better what is said to 
you.’ 

Turin said nothing, but turned his eyes upon Saeros, and there was a glint in their 
darkness. But Saeros did not heed the warning, and returned the gaze with scorn, saying 
for all to hear: ’If the Men of Hithlum are so wild and fell, of what sort are the women of 
that land? 

Do they run like the deer clad only in their hair?’ 

Then Turin took up a drinking-vessel and cast it in Saeros’ face, and he fell backward 
with great hurt; and Turin drew his sword and would have run at him, but Mablung 



restrained him. Then Saeros rising spat blood upon the board, and spoke as best he could 
with a broken mouth: 'How long shall we harbour this woodwose? Who rules here 
tonight? The King's law is heavy upon those who hurt his lieges in the hall; and for those 
who draw blades there outlawry is the least doom. Outside the hall I could answer you, 
Woodwose!' 

But when Turin saw the blood upon the table his mood became cold; and with a shrug he 
released himself from Mablung and left the hall without a word. 

Then Mablung said to Saeros: 'What ails you tonight? For this evil I hold you to blame; 
and maybe the King's law will judge a broken mouth a just return for your taunting.' 

'If the cub has a grievance, let him bring it to the King's judgement,' answered Saeros. 

'But the drawing of swords here is not to be excused for any such cause. Outside the hall, 
if the woodwose draws on me, I shall kill him.' 

'It might well go otherwise,' said Mablung. 'But if either be slain it will be an evil deed, 
more fit for Angband than Doriath, and more evil will come of it. Indeed I feel that some 
shadow of the North has reached out to touch us tonight. Take heed, Saeros, lest you do 
the will of Morgoth in your pride, and remember that you are of the Eldar.’ 

'I do not forget it,' said Saeros; but he did not abate his wrath, and through the night his 
malice grew, nursing his injury. 

In the morning he waylaid Turin, as he set off early from Menegroth, intending to go 
back to the marches. Turin had gone only a little way when Saeros ran out upon him from 
behind with drawn sword and shield on arm. But Turin, trained in the wild to wariness, 
saw him from the comer of his eye, and leaping aside he drew swiftly and turned upon 
his foe. 

'Morwen!' he cried, 'now your mocker shall pay for his scorn!’ And he clove Saeros' 
shield, and then they fought together with swift blades. 

But Turin had been long in a hard school, and had grown as agile as any Elf, but stronger. 
He soon had the mastery, and wounding Saeros' sword-ann he had him at his mercy. 

Then he set his foot on the sword that Saeros had let fall. 'Saeros,' he said, 'there is a long 
race before you, and clothes will be a hindrance; hair must suffice.’ And suddenly 
throwing him to the ground he stripped him, and Saeros felt Turin's great strength, and 
was afraid. But Turin let him up, and then 'Run, ran, mocker of women!’ he cried. 'Run! 
And unless you go swift as the deer I shall prick you on from behind.’ Then he set the 
point of the sword in Saeros' buttock; and he fled into the wood, crying wildly for help in 
his terror; but Turin came after him like a hound, and however he ran, or swerved, still 
the sword was behind him to egg him on. 


The cries of Saeros brought many others to the chase, and they followed after, but only 
the swiftest could keep up with the runners. Mablung was in the forefront of these, and he 



was troubled in mind, for though the taunting had seemed evil to him, ’malice that wakes 
in the morning is the mirth of Morgoth ere night'; and it was held moreover a grievous 
thing to put any of the Elven-folk to shame, self-willed, without the matter being brought 
to judgement. 

None knew at that time that Turin had been assailed first by Saeros, who would have 
slain him. 

'Hold, hold, Turin!' he cried. 'This is Ore-work in the woods!' 

'Ore-work there was; this is only Ore -play,' Turin called back. Before Mablung spoke he 
had been on the point of releasing Saeros, but now with a shout he sprang after him 
again; and Saeros, despairing at last of aid and thinking his death close behind, ran wildly 
on, until he came suddenly to a brink where a stream that fed Esgalduin flowed in a deep 
cleft through high rocks, and it was wide for a deer-leap. In his terror Saeros attempted 
the leap; but he failed of his footing on the far side and fell back with a cry, and was 
broken on a great stone in the water. 

So he ended his life in Doriath; and long would Mandos hold him. 

Turin looked down on his body lying in the stream, and he thought: 'Unhappy fool! From 
here I would have let him walk back to Menegroth. 

Now he has laid a guilt upon me undeserved.’ And he turned and looked darkly on 
Mablung and his companions, who now came up and stood near him on the brink. Then 
after a silence Mablung said gravely: 'Alas! But come back now with us, Turin, for the 
King must judge these deeds.' 

But Turin said: 'If the King were just, he would judge me guiltless. But was not this one 
of his counsellors? Why should a just king choose a heart of malice for his friend? I 
abjure his law and his judgement.' 

'Your words are too proud,' said Mablung, though he pitied the young man. 'Learn 
wisdom! You shall not turn runagate. I bid you return with me, as a friend. And there are 
other witnesses. When the King leams the truth you may hope for his pardon.' 

But Turin was weary of the Elven-halls, and he feared lest he be held captive; and he said 
to Mablung: 'I refuse your bidding. I will not seek King Thingol's pardon for nothing; and 
I will go now where his doom cannot find me. You have but two choices: to let me go 
free, or to slay me, if that would fit your law. For you are too few to take me alive.' 

They saw by the fire in his eyes that this was true, and they let him pass. 'One death is 
enough,' said Mablung. 

'I did not will it, but I do not mourn it,' said Turin. 'May Mandos judge him justly; and if 
ever he return to the lands of the living, may he prove wiser. Farewell!' 



'Fare free!' said Mablung; 'for that is your wish. To say well would be vain, if you go in 
this way. A shadow is over you. When we meet again, may it be no darker.’ 

To that Turin made no answer, but left them, and went swiftly away, alone, none knew 
whither. 

It is told that when Turin did not return to the north-marches of Doriath and no tidings 
could be heard of him, Beleg Strongbow came himself to Menegroth to seek him; and 
with heavy heart he gathered news of Turin's deeds and flight. Soon afterwards Thingol 
and Melian came back to their halls, for the summer was waning; and when the King 
heard report of what had passed he said: 'This is a grievous matter, which I must hear in 
full. Though Saeros, my counsellor, is slain, and Turin my foster-son has fled, tomorrow 
I will sit in the seat of judgement, and hear again all in due order, before I speak my 
doom.’ 

Next day the King sat upon his throne in his court, and about him were all the chiefs and 
elders of Doriath. Then many witnesses were heard, and of these Mablung spoke most 
and clearest. And as he told of the quarrel at table, it seemed to the King that Mablung's 
heart leaned to Turin. 

'You speak as a friend of Turin son of Hurin?' said Thingol. 'I was, but I have loved truth 
more and longer,’ Mablung answered. 'Hear me to the end, lord!' 

When all was told, even to the parting words of Turin, Thingol sighed; and he looked on 
those that sat before him, and he said: 'Alas! I see a shadow on your faces. How has it 
stolen into my realm? Malice is at work here. Saeros I accounted faithful and wise; but if 
he lived he would feel my anger, for his taunting was evil, and I hold him to blame for all 
that chanced in the hall. So far Turin has my pardon. But I cannot pass over his later 
deeds, when wrath should have cooled. The shaming of Saeros and the hounding of him 
to his death were wrongs greater than the offence. They show a heart hard and proud.’ 

Then Thingol sat for a while in thought, and spoke sadly at last. 'This is an ungrateful 
foster-son, and in truth a man too proud for his state. 

How can I still harbour one who scorns me and my law, or pardon one who will not 
repent? This must be my doom. I will banish Turin from Doriath. 

If he seeks entry he shall be brought to judgement before me; and until he sues for pardon 
at my feet he is my son no longer. If any here accounts this unjust, let him speak now!' 

Then there was silence in the hall, and Thingol lifted up his hand to pronounce his doom. 
But at that moment Beleg entered in haste, and cried: 'Lord, may I yet speak?' 


'You come late,' said Thingol. 'Were you not bidden with the others?’ 



’Truly, lord,' answered Beleg, 'but I was delayed; I sought for one whom I knew. Now I 
bring at last a witness who should be heard, ere your doom falls.’ 


'AH were summoned who had aught to tell,' said the King. 'What can he tell now of more 
weight than those to whom I have listened?' 

'You shall judge when you have heard,' said Beleg. 'Grant this to me, if I have ever 
deserved your grace.’ 

'To you I grant it,' said Thingol. Then Beleg went out, and led in by the hand the maiden 
Nellas, who dwelt in the woods, and came never into Menegroth; and she was afraid, as 
much of the great pillared hall and the roof of stone as of the company of many eyes that 
watched her. And when Thingol bade her speak, she said: 'Lord, I was sitting in a tree'; 
but then she faltered in awe of the King, and could say no more. 

At that the King smiled, and said: 'Others have done this also, but have felt no need to tell 
me of it.' 

'Others indeed,’ said she, taking courage from his smile. 'Even Luthicn! 

And of her I was thinking that morning, and of Beren the Man.’ 

To that Thingol said nothing, and he smiled no longer, but waited until Nellas should 
speak again. 

'For Turin reminded me of Beren,’ she said at last. 'They are akin, I am told, and their 
kinship can be seen by some: by some that look close.’ 

Then Thingol grew impatient. 'That may be,’ he said. 'But Turin son of Hurin is gone in 
scorn of me, and you will see him no more to read his kindred. For now I will speak my 
judgement.’ 

'Lord King!' she cried then. 'Bear with me, and let me speak first. I sat in a tree to look on 
Turin as he went away; and I saw Saeros come out from the wood with sword and shield, 
and spring on Turin at unawares.' 

At that there was a murmur in the hall; and the King lifted his hand, saying: 'You bring 
graver news to my ear than seemed likely. Take heed now to all that you say; for this is a 
court of doom.' 

'So Beleg has told me,' she answered, 'and only for that have I dared to come here, so that 
Turin shall not be ill judged. He is valiant, but he is merciful. They fought, lord, these 
two, until Turin had bereft Saeros of both shield and sword; but he did not slay him. 
Therefore I do not believe that he willed his death in the end. If Saeros were put to 
shame, it was shame that he had earned.’ 



'Judgement is mine,' said Thingol. 'But what you have told shall govern it.' Then he 
questioned Nellas closely; and at last he turned to Mablung, saying: 'It is strange to me 
that Turin said nothing of this to you.' 

'Yet he did not,' said Mablung, 'or I should have recounted it. And otherwise should I 
have spoken to him at our parting.’ 

'And otherwise shall my doom now be,' said Thingol. 'Hear me! Such fault as can be 
found in Turin I now pardon, holding him wronged and provoked. 

And since it was indeed, as he said, one of my council who so misused him, he shall not 
seek for this pardon, but I will send it to him, wherever he may be found; and I will recall 
him in honour to my halls.' 

But when the doom was pronounced, suddenly Nellas wept. 'Where can he be found?' she 
said. 'He has left our land, and the world is wide.’ 

'He shall be sought,' said Thingol. Then he rose, and Beleg led Nellas forth from 
Menegroth; and he said to her: 'Do not weep; for if Turin lives or walks still abroad, I 
shall find him, though all others fail.’ 

On the next day Beleg came before Thingol and Melian, and the King said to him: 
'Counsel me, Beleg; for I am grieved. I took Hurin's son as my son, and so he shall 
remain, unless Hurin himself should return out of the shadows to claim his own. 

I would not have any say that Turin was driven forth unjustly into the wild, and gladly 
would I welcome him back; for I loved him well.’ 

'Give me leave, lord,' said Beleg, 'and on your behalf I will redress this evil, if I can. For 
such manhood as he promised should not run to nothing in the wild. Doriath has need of 
him, and the need will grow more. And I love him also.’ 

Then Thingol said to Beleg: 'Now I have hope in the quest! Go with my good will, and if 
you find him, guard him and guide him as you may. 

Beleg Cuthalion, long have you been foremost in the defence of Doriath, and for many 
deeds of valour and wisdom have earned my thanks. Greatest of all I shall hold the 
finding of Turin. At this parting ask for any gift, and I will not deny it to you.’ 

'I ask then for a sword of worth,' said Beleg; 'for the Ores come now too thick and close 
for a bow only, and such blade as I have is no match for their armour.' 

'Choose from all that I have,' said Thingol, 'save only Aranruth, my own.' 

Then Beleg chose Anglachel; and that was a sword of great fame, and it was so named 
because it was made of iron that fell from heaven as a blazing star; it would cleave all 



earth-dolven iron. One other sword only in Middle-earth was like to it. That sword does 
not enter into this tale, though it was made of the same ore by the same smith; and that 
smith was Eol the Dark Elf, who took Aredhel Turgon's sister to wife. He gave Anglachel 
to Thingol as fee, which he begrudged, for leave to dwell in Nan Elmoth; but the other 
sword, Anguirel, its mate, he kept, until it was stolen from him by Maeglin, his son. 

But as Thingol turned the hilt of Anglachel towards Beleg, Melian looked at the blade; 
and she said: ’There is malice in this sword. The heart of the smith still dwells in it, and 
that heart was dark. It will not love the hand that it serves; neither will it abide with you 
long.’ 

'Nonetheless I will wield it while I may,' said Beleg; and thanking the king he took the 
sword and departed. Far across Beleriand he sought in vain for tidings of Turin, through 
many perils; and that winter passed away, and the spring after. 



CHAPTER VI 


TURIN AMONG THE OUTLAWS 


Now the tale turns again to Turin. He, believing himself an outlaw whom the King would 
pursue, did not return to Beleg on the north-marches of Doriath, but went away 
westward, and passing secretly out of the Guarded Realm came into the woodlands south 
of Teiglin. There before the Nirnaeth many men had dwelt in scattered homesteads; they 
were of Haleth's folk for the most part, but owned no lord, and they lived both by hunting 
and husbandry, keeping swine in the mast-lands, and tilling clearings in the forest which 
were fenced from the wild. But most were now destroyed, or had fled into Brethil, and all 
that region lay under the fear of Ores, and of outlaws. For in that time of ruin houseless 
and desperate men went astray: remnants of battle and defeat, and lands laid waste; and 
some were men driven into the wild for evil deeds. They hunted and gathered such food 
as they could; but many took to robbery and became cruel, when hunger or other need 
drove them. In winter they were most to be feared, like wolves; and Gaurwaith, wolf- 
men, they were called by those who still defended their homes. Some sixty of these men 
had joined in one band, wandering in the woods beyond the western marches of Doriath; 
and they were hated scarcely less than Ores, for there were among them outcasts hard of 
heart, bearing a grudge against their own kind. 

The hardest of heart was one named Androg, who had been hunted from Dor-lomin for 
the slaying of a woman; and others also came from that land: old Algund, the oldest of 
the fellowship, who had fled from the Nirnaeth, and Forweg, as he named himself, a man 
with fair hair and unsteady glittering eyes, big and bold, but far fallen from the ways of 
the Edain of the people of Hador. Yet he could still be wise and generous at times; and he 
was the captain of the fellowship. They had dwindled now to some fifty men, by deaths 
in hardship or affrays; and they were become wary, and set scouts or a watch about them, 
whether moving or at rest. Thus they were soon aware of Turin when he strayed into their 
haunts. They trailed him, and they drew a ring about him, so that suddenly, as he came 
out into a glade beside a stream, he found himself within a circle of men with bent bows 
and drawn swords. 

Then Turin halted, but he showed no fear. 'Who are you?' he said. 'I thought that only 
Ores waylaid men; but I see that I am mistaken.’ 

'You may rue the mistake,' said Forweg, 'for these are our haunts, and my men do not 
allow other men to walk in them. We take their lives as forfeit, unless they can ransom 
them.' 



Then Turin laughed grimly: 'You will get no ransom from me, an outcast and an outlaw. 
You may search me when I am dead, but it may cost you dearly to prove my words true. 
Many of you are likely to die first.' 

Nonetheless his death seemed near, for many arrows were notched to the string, waiting 
for the word of the captain, and though Turin wore elven-mail under his grey tunic and 
cloak, some would find a deadly mark. None of his enemies stood within reach of a leap 
with drawn sword. 

But suddenly Turin stooped, for he had espied some stones at the stream's edge before his 
feet. At that moment an outlaw, angered by his proud words, let fly a shaft aimed at his 
face; but it passed over him, and he sprang up again like a bowstring released and cast a 
stone at the bowman with great force and true aim; and he fell to the ground with broken 
skull. 

'I might be of more service to you alive, in the place of that luckless man,' said Turin; and 
turning to Forweg he said: 'If you are the captain here, you should not allow your men to 
shoot without command.’ 

'I do not,' said Forweg; 'but he has been rebuked swiftly enough. I will take you in his 
stead, if you will heed my words better.' 

'I will,' said Turin, 'as long as you are captain, and in all that belongs to a captain. But the 
choice of a new man to a fellowship is not his alone, I judge. All voices should be heard. 
Are there any here who do not welcome me?' 

Then two of the outlaws cried out against him; and one was a friend of the fallen man. 
Ulrad was his name. 'A strange way to gain entry to a fellowship,’ he said, 'the slaying of 
one of our best men!' 

'Not unchallenged,' said Turin. 'But come then! I will endure you both together, with 
weapons or with strength alone. Then you shall see if I am fit to replace one of your best 
men. But if there are bows in this test, I must have one too.’ Then he strode towards them; 
but Ulrad gave back and would not fight. The other threw down his bow and walked up 
to meet Turin. This man was Androg of Dor-lomin. He stood before Turin and looked 
him up and down. 

'Nay,' he said at length, shaking his head. 'I am not a chicken-heart, as men know; but I 
am not your match. There is none here, I think. You may join us, for my part. But there is 
a strange light in your eyes; you are a dangerous man. What is your name?' 


'Neithan, the Wronged, I call myself,' said Turin, and Neithan he was afterwards called 
by the outlaws; but though he claimed to have suffered injustice (and to any who claimed 
the like he ever lent too ready an ear), no more would he reveal concerning his life or his 
home. Yet they saw that he had fallen from high state, and that though he had nothing but 



his arms, those were made by elven-smiths. He soon won their praise, for he was strong 
and valiant, and had more skill in the woods than they, and they trusted him, for he was 
not greedy, and took little thought for himself; but they feared him, because of his sudden 
angers, which they seldom understood. 

To Doriath Turin could not, or in pride would not, return; to Nargothrond since the fall of 
Felagund none were admitted. To the lesser folk of Haleth in Brethil he did not deign to 
go; and to Dor-lomin he did not dare, for it was closely beset, and one man alone could 
not hope at that time, as he thought, to come through the passes of the Mountains of 
Shadow. Therefore Turin abode with the outlaws, since the company of any men made 
the hardship of the wild more easy to endure; and because he wished to live and could not 
be ever at strife with them, he did little to restrain their evil deeds. Thus he soon became 
hardened to a mean and often cruel life, and yet at times pity and disgust would wake in 
him, and then he was perilous in his anger. In this evil and dangerous way Turin lived to 
that year's end and through the need and hunger of winter, until stirring came and then a 
fair spring. 

Now in the woods of Teiglin, as has been told, there were still some homesteads of Men, 
hardy and wary, though now few in number. Though they loved them not at all and pitied 
them little, they would in bitter winter put out such food as they could well spare where 
the Gaur-waith might find it; and so they hoped to avoid the banded attack of the 
famished. But they earned less gratitude so from the outlaws than from beasts and birds, 
and they were saved rather by their dogs and their fences. For each homestead had great 
hedges about its cleared land, and about the houses was a ditch and a stockade; and there 
were paths from stead to stead, and men could summon help at need by horn-calls. 

But when spring was come it was perilous for the Gaurwaith to linger so near to the 
houses of the woodmen, who might gather and hunt them down; and Turin wondered 
therefore that Forweg did not lead them away. There was more food and game, and less 
peril, away south where no Men remained. Then one day Turin missed Forweg, and also 
Androg his friend; and he asked where they were, but his companions laughed. 

'Away on business of their own, I guess,' said Ulrad. 'They will be back before long, and 
then we shall move. In haste, maybe; for we shall be lucky if they do not bring the hive- 
bees after them.’ 

The sun shone and the young leaves were green, and Turin was irked by the squalid camp 
of the outlaws, and he wandered away alone far into the forest. Against his will he 
remembered the Hidden Kingdom, and he seemed to hear the names of the flowers of 
Doriath as echoes of an old tongue almost forgotten. But on a sudden he heard cries, and 
from a hazel-thicket a young woman ran out; her clothes were rent by thorns, and she was 
in great fear, and stumbling she fell gasping to the ground. 


Then Turin springing towards the thicket with drawn sword hewed down a man that burst 
from the hazels in pursuit; and he saw only in the very stroke that it was Forweg. 



But as he stood looking down in amaze at the blood upon the grass, Androg came out, 
and halted also astounded. 'Evil work, Neithan!’ he cried, and drew his sword; but Turin's 
mood ran cold, and he said to Androg: 'Where are the Ores, then? Have you outrun them 
to help her?' 

'Ores?' said Androg. 'Fool! You call yourself an outlaw. Outlaws know no law but their 
needs. Look to your own, Neithan, and leave us to mind ours.' 

'I will do so,' said Turin. 'But today our paths have crossed. You will leave the woman to 
me, or you will join Forweg.’ 

Androg laughed. 'If that is the way of it, have your will,’ he said. 'I make no claim to 
match you, alone; but our fellows may take this slaying ill.’ 

Then the woman rose to her feet and laid her hand on Turin's arm. She looked at the 
blood and she looked at Turin, and there was delight in her eyes. 'Kill him, lord!' she said. 
'Kill him too! And then come with me. If you bring their heads, Larnach my father will 
not be displeased. 

For two "wolf-heads" he has rewarded men well.' 

But Turin said to Androg: 'Is it far to her home?' 

'A mile or so,' he answered, 'in a fenced homestead yonder. She was straying outside.’ 'Go 
then quickly,' said Turin, turning back to the woman. 'Tell your father to keep you better. 
But I will not cut off the heads of my fellows to buy his favour, or aught else.’ 

Then he put up his sword. 'Come!' he said to Androg. 'We will return. 

But if you wish to bury your captain, you must do so yourself. Make haste, for a hue and 
cry may be raised. Bring his weapons!’ 

The woman went off through the woods, and she looked back many times before the trees 
hid her. Then Turin went on his way without more words, and Androg watched him go, 
and he frowned as one pondering a riddle. 

When Turin came back to the camp of the outlaws he found them restless and ill at ease; 
for they had stayed too long already in one place, near to homesteads well-guarded, and 
they murmured against Forweg. 'He runs hazards to our cost', they said; 'and others may 
have to pay for his pleasures.’ 

'Then choose a new captain!' said Turin, standing before them. 'Forweg can lead you no 
longer; for he is dead.’ 


'How do you know that?' said Ulrad. 'Did you seek honey from the same hive? Did the 
bees sting him?’ 



’No,' said Turin. 'One sting was enough. I slew him. But I spared Androg, and he will 
soon return.' Then he told all that was done, rebuking those that did such deeds; and 
while he yet spoke Androg returned bearing Forweg's weapons. 'See, Neithan!' he cried. 
'No alarm has been raised. Maybe she hopes to meet with you again.’ 

'If you jest with me,' said Turin, 'I shall regret that I grudged her your head. Now tell your 
tale, and be brief.’ 

Then Androg told truly enough all that had befallen. 'What business Neithan had there I 
now wonder,’ he said. 'Not ours, it seems. For when I came up, he had already slain 
Forweg. The woman liked that well, and offered to go with him, begging our heads as a 
bride-price. But he did not want her, and sped her off; so what grudge he had against the 
captain I cannot guess. He left my head on my shoulders, for which I am grateful, though 
much puzzled.' 

'Then I deny your claim to come of the People of Hador,' said Turin. 'To Uldor the 
Accursed you belong rather, and should seek service with Angband. But hear me now!' 
he cried to them all. 'These choices I give you. You must take me as your captain in 
Forweg's place, or else let me go. I will govern this fellowship now, or leave it. But if you 
wish to kill me, set to! I will fight you all until I am dead - or you.’ 

Then many men seized their weapons, but Androg cried out: 'Nay! The head that he 
spared is not witless. If we fight, more than one will die needlessly, before we kill the 
best man among us.' Then he laughed. 'As it was when he joined us, so it is again. He 
kills to make room. If it proved well before, so may it again; and he may lead us to better 
fortune than prowling about other men's middens.’ 

And old Algund said: 'The best man among us. Time was when we would have done the 
same, if we dared; but we have forgotten much. He may bring us home in the end.’ 

At that the thought came to Turin that from this small band he might rise to build himself 
a free lordship of his own. But he looked at Algund and Androg, and he said: 'Home, do 
you say? 

Tall and cold stand the Mountains of Shadow between. Behind them are the people of 
Uldor, and about them the legions of Angband. If such things do not daunt you, seven 
times seven men, then I may lead you homewards. 

But how far, before we die?' 

All were silent. Then Turin spoke again. 'Do you take me to be your captain? Then I will 
lead you first away into the wild, far from the homes of Men. There we may find better 
fortune, or not; but at the least we shall earn less hatred of our own kind.’ 



Then all those that were of the People of Hador gathered to him, and took him as their 
captain; and the others with less good will agreed. 

And at once he led them away out of that country. 

Many messengers had been sent out by Thingol to seek Turin within Doriath and in the 
lands near its borders; but in the year of his flight they searched for him in vain, for none 
knew or could guess that he was with the outlaws and enemies of Men. When winter 
came on they returned to the King, save Beleg only. After all others had departed still he 
went on alone. 

But in Dimbar and along the north-marches of Doriath things had gone ill. The Dragon- 
helm was seen there in battle no longer, and the Strongbow also was missed; and the 
servants of Morgoth were heartened and increased ever in numbers and in daring. Winter 
came and passed, and with Spring their assault was renewed: Dimbar was overrun, and 
the Men of Brethil were afraid, for evil roamed now upon all their borders, save in the 
south. 

It was now almost a year since Turin had fled, and still Beleg sought for him, with ever 
lessening hope. He passed northwards in his wanderings to the Crossings of Teiglin, and 
there, hearing ill news of a new inroad of Ores out of Taur-nu-Fuin, he turned back, and 
came as it chanced to the homes of the Woodmen soon after Turin had left that region. 
There he heard a strange tale that went among them. A tall and lordly Man, or an Elf- 
warrior, some said, had appeared in the woods, and had slain one of the Gaurwaith, and 
rescued the daughter of Lamach whom they were pursuing. ’Very proud he was,' said 
Larnach's daughter to Beleg, 'with bright eyes that scarcely deigned to look at me. Yet he 
called the Wolf-men his fellows, and would not slay another that stood by, and knew his 
name. Neithan, he called him.' 

'Can you read this riddle?' asked Larnach of the Elf. 

'I can, alas,' said Beleg. 'The Man that you tell of is one whom I seek.' No more of Turin 
did he tell the Woodmen; but he warned them of evil gathering northward. 'Soon the Ores 
will come ravening in this country in strength too great for you to withstand,’ he said. 

'This year at last you must give up your freedom or your lives. Go to Brethil while there 
is time!' 

Then Beleg went on his way in haste, and sought for the lairs of the outlaws, and such 
signs as might show him whither they had gone. These he soon found; but Turin was now 
several days ahead, and moved swiftly, fearing the pursuit of the Woodmen, and he had 
used all the arts that he knew to defeat or mislead any that tried to follow him. He led his 
men westward, away from the Woodmen and from the borders of Doriath, until they 
came to the northern end of the great highlands that rose between the Vales of Sirion and 
Narog. There the land was drier, and the forest ceased suddenly on the brink of a ridge. 
Below it could be seen the ancient South Road, climbing up from the Crossings of 
Teiglin to pass along the western feet of the moorlands on its way to Nargothrond. There 



for a time the outlaws lived warily, remaining seldom two nights in one camp, and 
leaving little trace of their going or staying. So it was that even Beleg hunted them in 
vain. 

Led by signs that he could read, or by the rumour of the passing of Men among the wild 
things with whom he could speak, he came often near, but always their lair was deserted 
when he came to it; for they kept a watch about them by day and night, and at any rumour 
of approach they were swiftly up and away. 'Alas!' he cried. 'Too well did I teach this 
child of Men craft in wood and field! An Elvish band almost one might think this to be.' 
But they for their part became aware that they were trailed by some tireless pursuer, 
whom they could not see, and yet could not shake off; and they grew uneasy. 

Not long afterwards, as Beleg had feared, the Ores came across the Brithiach, and being 
resisted with all the force that he could muster by Handir of Brethil, they passed south 
over the Crossings of Teiglin in search of plunder. Many of the Woodmen had taken 
Beleg's counsel and sent their woman and children to ask for refuge in Brethil. These and 
their escort escaped, passing over the Crossings in time; but the armed men that came 
behind were met by the Ores, and the men were worsted. A few fought their way through 
and came to Brethil, but many were slain or captured; and the Ores passed on to the 
homesteads, and sacked them and burned them. Then at once they turned back 
westwards, seeking the Road, for they wished now to return back north as swiftly as they 
could with their booty and their captives. 

But the scouts of the outlaws were soon aware of them; and though they cared little 
enough for the captives, the plunder of the Woodmen aroused their greed. To Turin it 
seemed perilous to reveal themselves to the Ores, until their numbers were known; but 
the outlaws would not heed him, for they had need of many things in the wild, and 
already some began to regret his leading. Therefore taking one Orleg as his only 
companion Turin went forth to spy upon the Ores; and giving command of the band to 
Androg he charged him to lie close and well hid while they were gone. 

Now the Ore-host was far greater than the band of outlaws, but they were in lands to 
which Ores had seldom dared to come, and they knew also that beyond the Road lay the 
Talath Dimen, the Guarded Plain, upon which the scouts and spies of Nargothrond kept 
watch; and fearing danger they were wary, and their scouts went creeping through the 
trees on either side of the marching lines. Thus it was that Turin and Orleg were 
discovered, for three scouts stumbled upon them as they lay hid; and though they slew 
two the third escaped, crying as he ran Going! 

Going! Now that was a name which they had for the Noldor. At once the forest was filled 
with Ores, scattering silently and hunting far and wide. Then Turin, seeing that there was 
small hope of escape, thought at least to deceive them and to lead them away from the 
hiding-place of his men; and perceiving from the cry of Going! that they feared the spies 
of Nargothrond, he fled with Orleg westward. The pursuit came swiftly after them, until 
turn and dodge as they would they were driven at last out of the forest; and then they 
were espied, and as they sought to cross the Road Orleg was shot down by many arrows. 



But Turin was saved by his elven-mail, and escaped alone into the wilds beyond; and by 
speed and craft he eluded his enemies, fleeing far into lands that were strange to him. 
Then the Ores, fearing that the Elves of Nargothrond might be aroused, slew their 
captives and made haste away into the North. 

Now when three days had passed, and yet Turin and Orleg did not return, some of the 
outlaws wished to depart from the cave where they lay hid; but Androg spoke against it. 
And while they were in the midst of this debate, suddenly a grey figure stood before 
them. Beleg had found them at last. He came forward with no weapon in his hands, and 
held the palms turned towards them; but they leapt up in fear and Androg coming behind 
cast a noose over him, and drew it so that it pinioned his arms. 

’If you do not wish for guests, you should keep better watch,’ said Beleg. ’Why do you 
welcome me thus? I come as a friend, and seek only a friend. Neithan, I hear that you call 
him.’ 

'He is not here,' said Ulrad. 'But unless you have long spied on us, how know you that 
name?' 

'He has long spied on us,' said Androg. 'This is the shadow that has dogged us. Now 
perhaps we shall leam his true purpose.’ Then he bade them tie Beleg to a tree beside the 
cave; and when he was hard bound hand and foot they questioned him. But to all their 
questions Beleg would give one answer only: 'A friend I have been to this Neithan since I 
first met him in the woods, and he was then but a child. I seek him only in love, and to 
bring him good tidings.’ 

'Let us slay him, and be rid of his spying,' said Androg in wrath; and he looked on the 
great bow of Beleg and coveted it, for he was an archer. But some of better heart spoke 
against him, and Algund said to him: 'The captain may return yet; and then you will rue 
it, if he learns that he has been robbed at once of a friend and of good tidings.' 

'I do not believe the tale of this Elf,' said Androg. 'He is a spy of the King of Doriath. But 
if he has indeed any tidings, he shall tell them to us; and we shall judge if they give us 
reason to let him live.’ 

'I shall wait for your captain,' said Beleg. 

'You shall stand there until you speak,' said Androg. 

Then at the egging of Androg they left Beleg tied to the tree without food or water, and 
they sat near eating and drinking; but he said no more to them. When two days and nights 
had passed in this way they became angry and fearful, and were eager to be gone; and 
most were now ready to slay the Elf. As night drew down they were all gathered about 
him, and Ulrad brought a brand from the little fire that was lit in the cave-mouth. But at 
that moment Turin returned. Coming silently, as was his custom, he stood in the shadows 
beyond the ring of men, and he saw the haggard face of Beleg in the light of the brand. 



Then he was stricken as with a shaft, and as if at the sudden melting of a frost tears long 
unshed filled his eyes. He sprang out and ran to the tree. 'Beleg! Beleg!' he cried. 'How 
have you come hither? And why do you stand so?' At once he cut the bonds from his 
friend, and Beleg fell forward into his anns. 

When Turin heard all that the men would tell, he was angry and grieved; but at first he 
gave heed only to Beleg. While he tended him with what skill he had, he thought of his 
life in the woods, and his anger turned upon himself. For often strangers had been slain, 
when caught near the lairs of the outlaws, or waylaid by them, and he had not hindered it; 
and often he himself had spoken ill of King Thingol and of the Grey-elves, so that he 
must share the blame, if they were treated as foes. Then with bitterness he turned to the 
men. 'You were cruel,’ he said, 'and cruel without need. Never until now have we 
tormented a prisoner; but to this Ore -work such a life as we lead has brought us. Lawless 
and fruitless all our deeds have been, serving only ourselves, and feeding hate in our 
hearts.’ 

But Androg said: 'But whom shall we serve, if not ourselves? Whom shall we love, when 
all hate us?' 

'At least my hands shall not again be raised against Elves or Men,’ said Turin. 'Angband 
has servants enough. If others will not take this vow with me, I will walk alone.’ 

Then Beleg opened his eyes and raised his head. 'Not alone!’ he said. 

'Now at last I can tell my tidings. You are no outlaw, and Neithan is a name unfit. Such 
fault as was found in you is pardoned. For a year you have been sought, to recall you to 
honour and to the service of the King. The Dragon-helm has been missed too long.’ 

But Turin showed no joy in this news, and sat long in silence; for at Beleg's words a 
shadow fell upon him again. 'Let this night pass,' he said at length. 'Then I will choose. 
However it goes, we must leave this lair tomorrow; for not all who seek us wish us well.' 

'Nay, none,' said Androg, and he cast an evil look at Beleg. 

In the morning Beleg, being swiftly healed of his pains, after the manner of the Elven- 
folk of old, spoke to Turin apart. 

'I looked for more joy at my tidings,' he said. 'Surely you will return now to Doriath?' 

And he begged Turin to do this in all ways that he could; but the more he urged it, the 
more Turin hung back. Nonetheless he questioned Beleg closely concerning the 
judgement of Thingol. Then Beleg told him all that he knew, and at the last Turin said: 
'Then Mablung proved my friend, as he once seemed?' 

'The friend of truth, rather,' said Beleg, 'and that was best, in the end; though the doom 
would have been less just, were it not for the witness of Nellas. Why, why, Turin, did you 



not speak of Saeros' assault to Mablung? All otherwise might things have gone. And,' he 
said, looking at the men sprawled near the mouth of the cave, 'you might have held your 
helm still high, and not fallen to this.’ 

'That may be, if fall you call it,' said Turin. 'That may be. But so it went; and words stuck 
in my throat. There was reproof in his eyes, without question asked of me, for a deed I 
had not done. My Man's heart was proud, as the Elf-king said. And so it still is, Beleg 
Cuthalion. 

Not yet will it suffer me to go back to Menegroth and bear looks of pity and pardon, as 
for a wayward boy amended. I should give pardon, not receive it. And I am a boy no 
longer, but a man, according to my kind; and a hard man by my fate.’ 

Then Beleg was troubled. 'What will you do, then?’ he asked. 

'Fare free,' said Turin. 'That wish Mablung gave me at our parting. The grace of Thingol 
will not stretch to receive these companions of my fall, I think; but I will not part with 
them now, if they do not wish to part with me. I love them in my way, even the worst a 
little. They are of my own kind, and there is some good in each that might grow. I think 
that they will stand by me.' 

'You see with other eyes than mine,' said Beleg. 'If you try to wean them from evil, they 
will fail you. I doubt them, and one most of all.’ 

'How shall an Elf judge of Men?' said Turin. 

'As he judges of all deeds, by whomsoever done,' answered Beleg, but he said no more, 
and did not speak of Androg's malice, to which his evil handling had been chiefly due; 
for perceiving Turin's mood he feared to be disbelieved and to hurt their old friendship, 
driving Turin back to his evil ways. 

'Fare free, you say, Turin, my friend,' he said. 'What is your meaning?' 

'I would lead my own men, and make war in my own way,' Turin answered. 

'But in this at least my heart is changed: I repent every stroke save those dealt against the 
Enemy of Men and Elves. And above all else I would have you beside me. Stay with me!' 

'If I stayed beside you, love would lead me, not wisdom,’ said Beleg. 

'My heart warns me that we should return to Doriath. Elsewhere a shadow lies before us.' 

'Nonetheless, I will not go there,' said Turin. 

'Alas!' said Beleg. 'But as a fond father who grants his son's desire against his own 
foresight, I yield to your will. At your asking, I will stay.' 



’That is well indeed!' said Turin. Then all at once he fell silent, as if he himself were 
aware of the shadow, and strove with his pride, which would not let him turn back. For a 
long while he sat, brooding on the years that lay behind. 

Coming suddenly out of thought he looked at Beleg, and said: 'The elf-maiden that you 
named, though I forget how: I owe her well for her timely witness; yet I cannot recall her. 
Why did she watch my ways?' 

Then Beleg looked strangely at him. 'Why indeed?’ he said. 'Turin, have you lived always 
with your heart and half your mind far away? As a boy you used to walk with Nellas in 
the woods.’ 

'That must have been long ago,' said Turin. 'Or so my childhood now seems, and a mist is 
over it - save only the memory of my father's house in Dor-lomin. Why would I walk 
with an elf-maiden?' 

'To learn what she could teach, maybe,' said Beleg, 'if no more than a few elven-words of 
the names of woodland flowers. Their names at least you have not forgotten. Alas! child 
of Men, there are other griefs in Middle-earth than yours, and wounds made by no 
weapon. Indeed I begin to think that Elves and Men should not meet or meddle.’ 

Turin said nothing, but looked long in Beleg's face, as if he would read in it the riddle of 
his words. Nellas of Doriath never saw him again, and his shadow passed from her. Now 
Beleg and Turin turned to other matters, debating where they should dwell. 

'Let us return to Dimbar, on the north-marches, where once we walked together!' said 
Beleg eagerly. 'We are needed there. For of late the Ores have found a way down outof 
Taur-nu-Fuin, making a road through the Pass of Anach.' 

'I do not remember it,' said Turin. 

'No, we never went so far from the borders,' said Beleg. 'But you have seen the peaks of 
the Crissaegrim far off, and to their east the dark walls of the Gorgoroth. Anach lies 
between them, above the high springs of Mind eb. A hard and dangerous way; and yet 
many come by it now, and Dimbar which used to lie in peace is falling under the Dark 
Hand, and the Men of Brethil are troubled. To Dimbar I call you!' 

'Nay, I will not walk backward in life,' said Turin. 'Nor can I come easily to Dimbar now. 
Sirion lies between, unbridged and unforded below the Brithiach far northward; it is 
perilous to cross. Save in Doriath. 

But I will not pass into Doriath, and make use of Thingol's leave and pardon.’ 

'A hard man you have called yourself, Turin. Truly, if by that you meant stubborn. Now 
the turn is mine. I will go, by your leave, as soon as I may, and bid you farewell. If you 



wish indeed to have the Strongbow beside you, look for me in Dimbar.' At that time 
Turin said no more. 

The next day Beleg set out, and Turin went with him a bowshot from the camp, but said 
nothing. ’Is it farewell, then, son of Hurin?' said Beleg. 

’If you wish indeed to keep your word and stay beside me,' answered Turin, 'then look for 
me on Arnon Rudh!’ Thus he spoke, being fey and unwitting of what lay before him. 

'Else, this is our last farewell.' 

'Maybe that is best,' said Beleg, and went his way. 

It is said that Beleg went back to Menegroth, and came before Thingol and Melian and 
told them of all that had happened, save only his evil handling by Turin's companions. 
Then Thingol sighed, and he said: 'I took up the fathering of the son of Hurin, and that 
cannot be laid down for love or hate, unless Hurin the Valiant himself should return. 

What more would he have me do?' 

But Melian said: 'A gift you shall now have of me, Cuthalion, for your help, and your 
honour, for I have none worthier to give.’ And she gave him a store of lembas, the 
waybread of the Elves, wrapped in leaves of silver; and the threads that bound it were 
sealed at the knots with the seal of the Queen, a wafer of white wax shaped as a single 
flower of Telperion. For according to the customs of the Eldalie the keeping and the 
giving of this food belonged to the Queen alone. 'This waybread, Beleg,' she said, 'shall 
be your help in the wild and the winter, and the help also of those whom you choose. For 
I commit this now to you, to apportion as you will in my stead.’ In nothing did Melian 
show greater favour to Turin than in this gift; for the Eldar had never before allowed Men 
to use this waybread, and seldom did so again. 

Then Beleg departed from Menegroth and went back to the north-marches, where he had 
his lodges, and many friends; but when winter came, and war was stilled, suddenly his 
companions missed Beleg, and he returned to them no more. 



CHAPTER VII 


OF MIM THE DWARF 


Now the tale turns to Mim the Petty-dwarf. The Petty-dwarves are long out of mind, for 
Mhn was the last. Little was known of them even in days of old. The Nibin-nogrim the 
Elves of Beleriand called them long ago, but they did not love them; and the Petty- 
dwarves loved none but themselves. If they hated and feared the Ores, they hated also the 
Eldar, and the Exiles most of all; for the Noldor, they said, had stolen their lands and their 
homes. Nargothrond was first found and its delving begun by the Petty-dwarves, long 
before Finrod Felagund came over the Sea. 

They came, some said, of Dwarves that had been banished from the Dwarf-cities of the 
east in ancient days. Long before the return of Morgoth they had wandered westward. 
Being masterless and few in number, they found it hard to come by the ore of metals, and 
their smith-craft and store of weapons dwindled; and they took to lives of stealth, and 
became somewhat smaller in stature than their eastern kin, walking with bent shoulders 
and quick, furtive steps. Nonetheless, as all the Dwarf-kind, they were far stronger than 
their stature promised, and they could cling to life in great hardship. But now at last they 
had dwindled and died out of Middle-earth, all save Mim and his two sons; and Mim was 
old even in the reckoning of Dwarves, old and forgotten. 

After the departure of Beleg (and that was in the second summer after the flight of Turin 
from Doriath) things went ill for the outlaws. There were rains out of season, and Ores in 
greater numbers than before came down from the North and along the old South Road 
over Teiglin, troubling all the woods on the west borders of Doriath. There was little 
safety or rest, and the company were more often hunted than hunters. 

One night as they lay lurking in the fireless dark, Turin looked on his life, and it seemed 
to him’that it might well be bettered. 'I must find some secure refuge,’ he thought, ’and 
make provision against winter and hunger.’ But he did not know whither to turn. 

Next day he led his men away southward, further than they had yet come from the 
Teiglin and the marches of Doriath; and after three days' journeying they halted at the 
western edge of the woods of Sirion’s Vale. There the land was drier and barer, as it 
began to climb up into the moorlands. 

Soon after, it chanced that as the grey light of a day of rain was failing Turin and his men 
were sheltering in a holly-thicket; and beyond it was a treeless space, in which there were 
many great stones, leaning or tumbled together. All was still, save for the drip of rain 
from the leaves. 



Suddenly a watchman gave a call, and leaping up they saw three hooded shapes, grey- 
clad, going stealthily among the stones. They were burdened each with a great sack, but 
they went swiftly for all that. Turin cried to them to halt, and the men ran out on them 
like hounds; but they held on their way, and though Androg shot at them two vanished in 
the dusk. 

One lagged behind, being slower or more heavily burdened; and he was soon seized and 
thrown down, and held by many hard hands, though he struggled and bit like a beast. But 
Turin came up, and rebuked his men. 

’What have you there?’ he said. ’What need to be so fierce? It is old and small. What hann 
is in it?' 


'It bites,' said Androg, nursing a bleeding hand. 'It is an Ore, or of Ore-kin. Kill it!’ 

'It deserves no less, for cheating our hope,' said another, who had taken the sack. 'There is 
nothing here but roots and small stones.’ 

'Nay,' said Turin, 'it is bearded. It is only a Dwarf, I guess. Let him up, and speak.’ 

So it was that Mhn came into the Tale of the Children of Hurin. For he stumbled up on 
his knees before Turin's feet and begged for his life. 'I am old,’ he said, 'and poor. Only a 
Dwarf, as you say, not an Ore. Mhn is my name. Do not let them slay me, master, for no 
cause, as Ores would.’ 

Then Turin pitied him in his heart, but he said: 'Poor you seem, Mhn, though that would 
be strange in a Dwarf; but we are poorer, I think: houseless and friendless Men. If I said 
that we do not spare for pity's sake only, being in great need, what would you offer for 
ransom?' 

'I do not know what you desire, lord,' said Mhn warily. 

'At this time, little enough!' said Turin, looking about him bitterly with rain in his eyes. 'A 
safe place to sleep in out of the damp woods. 

Doubtless you have such for yourself.' 

'I have,' said Mhn; 'but I cannot give it in ransom. I am too old to live under the sky.' 

'You need grow no older,' said Androg, stepping up with a knife in his unhanned hand. 'I 
can spare you that.’ 

'Lord!' cried Mhn in great fear, clinging to Turin's knees. 'If I lose my life, you lose the 
dwelling; for you will not find it without Mhn. I cannot give it, but I will share it. There 
is more room in it than once there was, so many have gone for ever,' and he began to 
weep. 



'Your life is spared, Mim,' said Turin. 

'Till we come to his lair, at least,' said Androg. 

But Turin turned upon him, and said: 'If Mim brings us to his home without trickery, and 
it is good, then his life is ransomed; and he shall not be slain by any man who follows 
me. So I swear.' 

Then Mim kissed Turin's knees and said: 'Mhn will be your friend, lord. 

At first he thought you were an Elf, by your speech and your voice. But if you are a Man, 
that is better. Mim does not love Elves.' 

'Where is this house of yours?' said Androg. 'It must be good indeed to share it with a 
Dwarf. For Androg does not like Dwarves. His people brought few good tales of that race 
out of the East.' 

'They left worse tales of themselves behind them,' said Mim. 'Judge my home when you 
see it. But you will need light on your way, you stumbling Men. I will return in good time 
and lead you.' Then he rose and picked up his sack. 

'No, no!' said Androg. 'You will not allow this, surely, captain? You would never see the 
old rascal again.’ 

'It is growing dark,' said Turin. 'Let him leave us some pledge. Shall we keep your sack 
and its load, Mhn?’ 

But at this the Dwarf fell on his knees again in great trouble. 'If Mim did not mean to 
return, he would not return for an old sack of roots,’ he said. 'I will come back. Let me 
go!’ 

'I will not,' said Turin. 'If you will not part with your sack, you must stay with it. A night 
under the leaves will make you pity us in your turn, maybe.’ But he marked, and others 
also, that Mim set more store by the sack and his load than it seemed worth to the eye. 

They led the old Dwarf away to their dismal camp, and as he went he muttered in a 
strange tongue that seemed harsh with ancient hatred; but when they put bonds on his 
legs he went suddenly quiet. And those who were on the watch saw him sitting on 
through the night silent and still as a stone, save for his sleepless eyes that glinted as they 
roved in the dark. 

Before morning the rain ceased, and a wind stirred in the trees. Dawn came more brightly 
than for many days, and light airs from the South opened the sky, pale and clear about the 
rising of the sun. Mim sat on without moving, and he seemed as if dead; for now the 
heavy lids of his eyes were closed, and the morning-light showed him withered and 



shrunken with age. Turin stood and looked down on him. 'There is light enough now,' he 
said. 


Then Mim opened his eyes and pointed to his bonds; and when he was released he spoke 
fiercely. 'Learn this, fools!' he said. 'Do not put bonds on a Dwarf! He will not forgive it. 

I do not wish to die, but for what you have done my heart is hot. I repent my promise.’ 

'But I do not,' said Turin. 'You will lead me to your home. Till then we will not speak of 
death. That is my will.' He looked steadfastly in the eyes of the Dwarf, and Mim could 
not endure it; few indeed could challenge the eyes of Turin in set will or in wrath. Soon 
he turned away his head, and rose. 'Follow me, lord!’ he said. 

'Good!' said Turin. 'But now I will add this: I understand your pride. 

You may die, but you shall not be set in bonds again.' 

'I will not,' said Mim. 'But come now!' And with that he led them back to the place where 
he had been captured, and he pointed westward. 'There is my home!' he said. 'You have 
often seen it, I guess, for it is tall. 

Sharbhund we called it, before the Elves changed all the names.' Then they saw that he 
was pointing to Arnon Rudh, the Bald Hill, whose bare head watched over many leagues 
of the wild. 

'We have seen it, but never nearer,' said Androg. 'For what safe lair can be there, or water, 
or any other thing that we need? I guessed that there was some trick. Do men hide on a 
hill-top?' 

'Long sight may be safer than lurking,' said Turin. 'Amon Rudh gazes far and wide. Well, 
Mim, I will come and see what you have to show. How long will it take us, stumbling 
Men, to come thither?' 

'All this day until dusk, if we start now,' answered Mim. 

Soon the company set out westward, and Turin went at the head with Mim at his side. 
They walked warily when they left the woods, but all the land seemed empty and quiet. 
They passed over the tumbled stones, and began to climb; for Amon Rudh stood upon the 
eastern edge of the high moorlands that rose between the vales of Sirion and Narog, and 
even above the stony heath at its base its crown was reared up a thousand feet and more. 
Upon the eastern side a broken land climbed slowly up to the high ridges among knots of 
birch and rowan, and ancient thorn-trees rooted in rock. Beyond, upon the moors and 
about the lower slopes of Amon Rudh, there grew thickets of aeglos; but its steep grey 
head was bare, save for the red seregon that mantled the stone. 



As the afternoon was waning the outlaws drew near to the roots of the hill. They came 
now from the north, for so Mim had led them, and the light of the westering sun fell upon 
the crown of Amon Rudh, and the seregon was all in flower. 

'See! There is blood on the hill-top,’ said Androg. 

’Not yet,’ said Turin. 

The sun was sinking and light was failing in the hollows. The hill now loomed up before 
them and above them, and they wondered what need there could be of a guide to so plain 
a mark. But as Mim led them on, and they began to climb the last steep slopes, they 
perceived that he was following some path by secret signs or old custom. Now his course 
wound to and fro, and if they looked aside they saw that at either hand dark dells and 
chines opened, or the land ran down into wastes of great stones with falls and holes 
masked by bramble and thorn. There without a guide they might have laboured and 
clambered for days to find a way. 

At length they came to steeper but smoother ground. They passed under the shadows of 
ancient rowan-trees, into aisles of long-legged aeglos: a gloom filled with a sweet scent. 
Then suddenly there was a rock-wall before them, flat-faced and sheer, forty feet high, 
maybe, but dusk dimmed the sky above them and guess was uncertain. 

'Is this the door of your house?’ said Turin. ’Dwarves love stone, it is said.’ He drew close 
to Mim, lest he should play them some trick at the last. 

’Not the door of the house, but the gate of the garth,’ said Mim. Then he turned to the 
right along the cliff-foot, and after twenty paces he halted suddenly; and Turin saw that 
by the work of hands or of weather there was a cleft so shaped that two faces of the wall 
overlapped, and an opening ran back to the left between them. Its entrance was shrouded 
by long trailing plants rooted in crevices above, but within there was a steep stony path 
going upward in the dark. Water trickled down it, and it was dank. 

One by one they filed up. At the top the path turned right and south again, and brought 
them through a thicket of thorns out upon a green flat, through which it ran on into the 
shadows. They had come to Mhn’s house, Bar-en-Nibin-noeg, which only ancient tales in 
Doriath and Nargothrond remembered, and no Men had seen. But night was falling, and 
the east was starlit, and they could not yet see how this strange place was shaped. 

Amon Rudh had a crown: a great mass like a steep cap of stone with a bare flattened top. 
Upon its north side there stood out from it a shelf, level and almost square, which could 
not be seen from below; for behind it stood the hill-crown like a wall, and west and east 
from its brink sheer cliffs fell. Only from the north, as they had come, could it be reached 
with ease by those who knew the way. From the ’gate’ a path led, and passed soon into a 
little grove of dwarfed birches growing about a clear pool in a rock-hewn basin. This was 
fed by a spring at the foot of the wall behind, and through a runnel it spilled like a white 
thread over the western brink of the shelf. Behind the screen of the trees, near the spring 



between two tall buttresses of rock, there was a cave. No more than a shallow grot it 
looked, with a low broken arch; but further in it had been deepened and bored far under 
the hill by the slow hands of the Petty-dwarves, in the long years that they had dwelt 
there, untroubled by the Grey-elves of the woods. 

Through the deep dusk Mhn led them past the pool, where now the faint stars were 
mirrored among the shadows of the birch-boughs. At the mouth of the cave he turned and 
bowed to Turin. 'Enter, lord!' he said: 'Bar-en-Danwedh, the House of Ransom. For so it 
shall be called.’ 

'That may be,' said Turin. 'I will look at it first.’ Then he went in with Mim, and the 
others, seeing him unafraid, followed behind, even Androg, who most misdoubted the 
Dwarf. They were soon in a black dark; but Mim clapped his hands, and a little light 
appeared, coming round a comer: from a passage at the back of the outer grot there 
stepped another Dwarf bearing a small torch. 

'Ha! I missed him, as I feared!' said Androg. But Mim spoke quickly with the other in 
their own harsh tongue, and seeming troubled or angered by what he heard, he darted into 
the passage and disappeared. Now Androg was all for going forward. 'Attack first!' he 
cried. 'There may be a hive of them; but they are small.' 

'Three only, I guess,' said Turin; and he led the way, while behind him the outlaws groped 
along the passage by the feel of the rough walls. 

Many times it bent this way and that at sharp angles; but at last a faint light gleamed 
ahead, and they came into a small but lofty hall, dim-lit by lamps hanging down out of 
the roof-shadow upon fine chains. 

Mim was not there, but his voice could be heard, and led by it Turin came to the door of a 
chamber opening at the back of the hall. Looking in, he saw Mim kneeling on the floor. 
Beside him stood silent the Dwarf with the torch; but on a stone couch by the far wall lay 
another. 'Khim, Khim, Kh im!’ the old Dwarf wailed, tearing at his beard. 

'Not all your shots went wild,’ said Turin to Androg. 'But this may prove an ill hit. You 
loose shaft too lightly; but you may not live long enough to leam wisdom.' 

Leaving the others, Turin entered softly and stood behind Mim, and spoke to him. 'What 
is the trouble, master?' he said. 'I have some healing arts. May I help you?' 

Mim turned his head, and his eyes had a red light. 'Not unless you can turn back time and 
cut off the cruel hands of your men,' he answered. 

'This is my son. An arrow was in his breast. Now he is beyond speech. He died at sunset. 
Your bonds held me from healing him.’ 


Again pity long hardened welled in Turin's heart as water from rock. 



’Alas!’ he said. 'I would recall that shaft, if I could. Now Bar-en-Danwedh, House of 
Ransom, shall this be called in truth. For whether we dwell here or no, I will hold myself 
in your debt; and if ever I come to any wealth, I will pay you a danwedh of heavy gold 
for your son, in token of sorrow, even if it gladdens your heart no more.’ 

Then Mim rose and looked long at Turin. 'I hear you,' he said. 'You speak like a dwarf- 
lord of old; and at that I marvel. Now my heart is cooled, though it is not glad. My own 
ransom I will pay, therefore: you may dwell here, if you will. But this I will add: he that 
loosed the shaft shall break his bow and his arrows and lay them at my son's feet; and he 
shall never take an arrow nor bear bow again. If he does, he shall die by it. That curse I 
lay on him.’ 

Androg was afraid when he heard of this curse; and though he did so with great grudge, 
he broke his bow and his arrows and laid them at the dead Dwarfs feet. But as he came 
out from the chamber, he glanced evilly at Mim, and muttered: 'The curse of a dwarf 
never dies, they say; but a Man's too may come home. May he die with a dart in his 
throat!' 

That night they lay in the hall and slept uneasily for the wailing of Mim and of Ibun, his 
other son. When that ceased they could not tell; but when they woke at last the Dwarves 
were gone and the chamber was closed by a stone. The day was fair again, and in the 
morning sunshine the outlaws washed in the pool and prepared such food as they had; 
and as they ate Mim stood before them. 

He bowed to Turin. 'He is gone and all is done,' he said. 'He lies with his fathers. Now we 
turn to such life as is left, though the days before us may be short. Does Mim’s home 
please you? Is the ransom paid and accepted?' 

'It is,' said Turin. 

'Then all is yours, to order your dwelling here as you will, save this: the chamber that is 
closed, none shall open it but me.’ 

'We hear you,' said Turin. 'But as for our life here, we are secure, or so it seems; but still 
we must have food, and other things. How shall we go out; or still more, how shall we 
return?' 

To their disquiet Mim laughed in his throat. 'Do you fear that you have followed a spider 
to the heart of his web?’ he said. 'Nay, Mim does not eat Men. And a spider could ill deal 
with thirty wasps at a time. See, you are armed, and I stand here bare. No, we must share, 
you and I: house, food, and fire, and maybe other winnings. The house, I guess, you will 
guard and keep secret for your own good, even when you know the ways in and out. Y ou 
will learn them in time. But in the meantime Mim must guide you, or Ibun his son, when 
you go out; and one will go where you go and return when you return - or await you at 



some point that you know and can find unguided. Ever nearer and nearer home will that 
be, I guess.’ 


To this Turin agreed, and he thanked Mim, and most of his men were glad; for under the 
sun of morning, while summer was yet high, it seemed a fair place to dwell in. Androg 
alone was ill-content. ’The sooner we are masters of our own goings and comings the 
better,’ he said. 'Never before have we taken a prisoner with a grievance to and fro on our 
ventures.’ 

That day they rested, and cleaned their anns and mended their gear; for they had food to 
last a day or two yet, and Mim added to what they had. 

Three great cooking-pots he lent to them, and firing; and he brought out a sack. ’Rubbish,’ 
he said. 'Not worth the stealing. Only wild roots.' 

But when they were washed the roots proved white and fleshy with their skins, and when 
boiled they were good to eat, somewhat like bread; and the outlaws were glad of them, 
for they had long lacked bread save when they could steal it. 'Wild Elves know them not; 
Grey-elves have not found them; the proud ones from over the Sea are too proud to 
delve,' said Mim. 

'What is their name?' said Turin. 

Mim looked at him sidelong. 'They have no name, save in the dwarf-tongue, which we do 
not teach,’ he said. 'And we do not teach Men to find them, for Men are greedy and 
thriftless, and would not spare till all the plants had perished; whereas now they pass 
them by as they go blundering in the wild. No more will you learn of me; but you may 
have enough of my bounty, as long as you speak fair and do not spy or steal.’ Then again 
he laughed in his throat. 'They are of great worth,’ he said. 'More than gold in the hungry 
winter, for they may be hoarded like the nuts of a squirrel, and already we were building 
our store from the first that are ripe. But you are fools, if you think that I would not be 
parted from one small load even for the saving of my life.’ 

'I hear you,' said Ulrad, who had looked in the sack when Mim was taken. 

'Yet you would not be parted, and your words only make me wonder the more.’ 

Mim turned and looked at him darkly. 'You are one of the fools that spring would not 
mourn if you perished in winter,' he said to him. 'I had spoken my word, and so must 
have returned, willing or not, with sack or without, let a lawless and faithless man think 
what he will! But I love not to be parted from my own by force of the wicked, be it no 
more than a shoe-thong. Do I not remember that your hands were among those that put 
bonds upon me, and so held me that I did not speak again with my son? Ever when I deal 
out the earth-bread from my store you will be counted out, and if you eat it, you shall eat 
by the bounty of your fellows, not of me.’ 



Then Mim went away; but Ulrad, who had quailed under his anger, spoke to his back: 
'High words! Nonetheless the old rogue had other things in his sack, of like shape but 
harder and heavier. Maybe there are other things beside earth-bread in the wild which 
Elves have not found and Men must not know!’ 

'That may be,' said Turin. 'Nonetheless the Dwarf spoke the truth in one point at least, 
calling you a fool. Why must you speak your thoughts? 

Silence, if fair words stick in your throat, would serve all our ends better.’ 

The day passed in peace, and none of the outlaws desired to go abroad. 

Turin paced much upon the green sward of the shelf, from brink to brink; and he looked 
out east, and west, and north, and wondered to find how far were the views in the clear 
air. Northward, and seeming strangely near, he could descry the forest of Brethil climbing 
green about the Arnon Obel. Thither he found that his eyes would stray more often than 
he wished, though he knew not why; for his heart was set rather to the northwest, where 
league upon league away on the skirts of the sky it seemed to him that he could glimpse 
the Mountains of Shadow and the borders of his home. But at evening Turin looked west 
into the sunset, as the sun rode down red into the hazes above the far distant coasts, and 
the Vale of Narog lay deep in the shadows between. 

So began the abiding of Turin son of Hurin in the halls of Mim, in Bar-en-Danwedh, the 
House of Ransom. 

For a long while the life of the outlaws went well to their liking. Food was not scarce, and 
they had good shelter, warm and dry, with room enough and to spare; for they found that 
the caves could have housed a hundred or more at need. There was another smaller hall 
further in. It had a hearth at one side, above which a smoke-shaft ran up through the rock 
to a vent cunningly hidden in a crevice on the hillside. There were also many other 
chambers, opening out of the halls or the passage between them, some for dwelling, some 
for works or for stores. In storage Mim had more arts than they, and he had many vessels 
and chests of stone and wood that looked to be of great age. But most of the chambers 
were now empty: in the armouries hung axes and other gear rusted and dusty, shelves and 
aumbries were bare; and the smithies were idle. Save one: a small room that led out of the 
inner hall and had a hearth which shared the smoke-vent of the hearth in the hall. There 
Mim would work at times, but would not allow others to be with him; and he did not tell 
of a secret hidden stair that led from his house to the flat summit of Amon Rudh. This 
Androg came upon when seeking in hunger to find Mim’s stores of food he became lost 
in the caves; but he kept this discovery to himself. 

During the rest of that year they went on no more raids, and if they stirred abroad for 
hunting or gathering of food they went for the most part in small parties. But for a long 
while they found it hard to retrace their road, and beside Turin not more than six of his 
men became ever sure of the way. Nonetheless, seeing that those skilled in such things 
could come to their lair without Mim's help, they set a watch by day and night near to the 



cleft in the north-wall. From the south they expected no enemies, nor was there fear of 
any climbing Arnon Rudh from that quarter; but by day there was at most times a 
watchman set on the top of the crown, who could look far all about. Steep as were the 
sides of the crown, the summit could be reached, for to the east of the cave-mouth rough 
steps had been hewn leading up to slopes where men could clamber unaided. 

So the year wore on without hurt or alarm. But as the days drew in, and the pool became 
grey and cold and the birches bare, and great rains returned, they had to pass more time in 
shelter. Then they soon grew weary of the dark under hill, or the dim half-light of the 
halls; and to most it seemed that life would be better if it were not shared with Mhn. 

Too often he would appear out of some shadowy corner or doorway when they thought 
him elsewhere; and when Mhn was near unease fell on their talk. They took to speaking 
ever to one another in whispers. 

Yet, and strange it seemed to them, with Turin it went otherwise; and he became ever 
more friendly with the old Dwarf, and listened more and more to his counsels. In the 
winter that followed he would sit for long hours with Mhn, listening to his lore and the 
tales of his life; nor did Turin rebuke him if he spoke ill of the Eldar. Mhn seemed well 
pleased, and showed much favour to Turin in return; him only would he admit to his 
smithy at times, and there they would talk softly together. 

But when autumn was passed the winter pressed them hard. Before Yule snow came 
down from the North heavier than they had known it in the river-vales; at that time, and 
ever the more as the power of Angband grew, the winters worsened in Beleriand. Amon 
Rudh was covered deep, and only the hardiest dared stir abroad. Some fell sick, and all 
were pinched with hunger. 

In the dim dusk of a day in midwinter there appeared suddenly among them a Man, as it 
seemed, of great bulk and girth, cloaked and hooded in white. He had eluded their 
watchmen, and he walked up to their fire without a word. When men sprang up he 
laughed and threw back his hood, and they saw that it was Beleg Strongbow. Under his 
wide cloak he bore a great pack in which he had brought many things for the help of men. 

In this way Beleg came back to Turin, yielding to his love against his wisdom. Turin was 
glad indeed, for he had often regretted his stubbornness; and now the desire of his heart 
was granted without the need to humble himself or to yield his own will. But if Turin was 
glad, not so was Androg, nor some others of his company. It seemed to them that there 
had been a tryst between Beleg and their captain, which he had kept secret from them; 
and Androg watched them jealously as the two sat apart in speech together. 

Beleg had brought with him the Helm of Hador; for he hoped that it might lift Turin's 
thought again above his life in the wild as the leader of a petty company. 'This is your 
own which I bring back to you,' he said to Turin as he took out the helm. 'It was left in 
my keeping on the north-marches; but was not forgotten, I think.' 



’Almost,' said Turin; 'but it shall not be so again'; and he fell silent, looking far away with 
the eyes of his thought, until suddenly he caught the gleam of another thing that Beleg 
held in his hand. It was the gift of Melian; but the silver leaves were red in the firelight, 
and when Turin saw the seal his eyes darkened. 'What have you there?’ he said. 

'The greatest gift that one who loves you still has to give,' answered Beleg. 'Here is 
lembas in-Elidh, the waybread of the Eldar that no man has yet tasted.' 

'The helm of my fathers I take, with good will for your keeping,' said Turin. 'But I will 
not receive gifts out of Doriath.’ 

'Then send back your sword and your arms,' said Beleg. 'Send back also the teaching and 
fostering of your youth. And let your men, who (you say) have been faithful, die in the 
desert to please your mood! 

Nonetheless this waybread was a gift not to you but to me, and I may do with it as I will. 
Eat it not, if it sticks in your throat; but others may be more hungry and less proud.’ 

Turin's eyes glinted, but as he looked in Beleg's face the fire in them died, and they went 
grey, and he said in a voice hardly to be heard: 'I wonder, friend, that you deign to come 
back to such a churl. From you I will take whatever you give, even rebuke. Henceforward 
you shall counsel me in all ways, save the road to Doriath only.' 



CHAPTER VIII 


THE LAND OF BOW AND HELM 


In the days that followed Beleg laboured much for the good of the Company. Those that 
were hurt or sick he tended, and they were quickly healed. For in those days the Grey- 
elves were still a high people, possessing great power, and they were wise in the ways of 
life and of all living things; and though they were less in crafts and lore than the Exiles 
from Valinor they had many arts beyond the reach of Men. Moreover Beleg the Archer 
was great among the people of Doriath; he was strong, and enduring, and far-sighted in 
mind as well as eye, and at need he was valiant in battle, relying not only upon the swift 
arrows of his long bow, but also upon his great sword Anglachel. And ever the more did 
hatred grow in the heart of Mim, who hated all Elves, as has been told, and who looked 
with a jealous eye on the love that Turin bore to Beleg. 

When winter passed, and the stirring came, and the spring, the outlaws soon had sterner 
work to do. Morgoth's might was moved; and as the long fingers of a groping hand the 
forerunners of his annies probed the ways into Beleriand. 

Who knows now the counsels of Morgoth? Who can measure the reach of his thought, 
who had been Melkor, mighty among the Ainur of the Great Song, and sat now, the dark 
lord upon a dark throne in the North, weighing in his malice all the tidings that came to 
him, whether by spy or by traitor, seeing in the eyes of his mind and understanding far 
more of the deeds and purposes of his enemies than even the wisest of them feared, save 
Melian the Queen. To her often his thought reached out, and there was foiled. 

In this year, therefore, he turned his malice towards the lands west of Sirion, where there 
was still power to oppose him. Gondolin still stood, but it was hidden. Doriath he knew, 
but could not enter yet. Further still lay Nargothrond, to which none of his servants had 
yet found the way, a name of fear to them; there the people of Finrod dwelt in hidden 
strength. And far away from the South, beyond the white woods of the birches of 
Nimbrethil, from the coast of Arvernien and the mouths of Sirion, came rumour of the 
Havens of the Ships. Thither he could not reach until all else had fallen. 

So now the Ores came down out of the North in ever greater numbers. 

Through Anach they came, and Dimbar was taken, and all the north-marches of Doriath 
were infested. Down the ancient road they came that led through the long defile of Sirion, 
past the isle where Minas Tirith of Finrod had stood, and so through the land between 
Malduin and Sirion and then on through the eaves of Brethil to the Crossings of Teiglin. 
Thence of old the road passed on into the Guarded Plain, and then, along the feet of the 
highlands watched over by Arnon Rudh, it ran down into the vale of Narog and came at 



last to Nargothrond. But the Ores did not go far upon that road as yet; for there dwelt now 
in the wild a terror that was hidden, and upon the red hill were watchful eyes of which 
they had not been warned. 

In that spring Turin put on again the Helm of Hador, and Beleg was glad. 

At first their company had less than fifty men, but the woodcraft of Beleg and the valour 
of Turin made them seem to their enemies as a host. 

The scouts of the Ores were hunted, their camps were espied, and if they gathered to 
march in force in some narrow place, out of the rocks or from the shadow of the trees 
there leaped the Dragon-helm and his men, tall and fierce. Soon at the very sound of his 
hom in the hills their captains would quail and the Ores would turn to flight before any 
arrow whined or sword was drawn. 

It has been told that when Mhn surrendered his hidden dwelling on Arnon Rudh to Turin 
and his company, he demanded that he who had loosed the arrow that slew his son should 
break his bow and his arrows and lay them at the feet of Khhn; and that man was Androg. 
Then with great ill-will Androg did as Mhn bade. Moreover Mhn declared that Androg 
must never again bear bow and arrow, and he laid a curse on him, that if nevertheless he 
should do so, then would he meet his own death by that means. 

Now in the spring of that year Androg defied the curse of Mhn and took up a bow again 
in a foray from Bar-en-Danwedh; and in that foray he was struck by a poisoned ore- 
arrow, and was brought back dying in pain. But Beleg healed him of his wound. And now 
the hatred that Mhn bore to Beleg was increased still more, for he had thus undone his 
curse; but 'it will bite again,' he said. 

In that year far and wide in Beleriand the whisper went, under wood and over stream and 
through the passes of the hills, saying that the Bow and Helm that had fallen in Dimbar 
(as was thought) had arisen again beyond hope. Then many, both Elves and Men, who 
went leaderless, dispossessed but undaunted, remnants of battle and defeat and lands laid 
waste, took heart again, and came to seek the Two Captains, though where they had their 
stronghold none yet knew. Turin received gladly all who came to him, but by the counsel 
of Beleg he admitted no newcomer to his refuge upon Arnon Rudh (and that was now 
named Echad i Sedryn, Camp of the Faithful); the way thither only those of the Old 
Company knew and no others were admitted. But other guarded camps and forts were 
established round about: in the forest eastward, or in the highlands, or in the southward 
fens, from Methed-en-glad (’the End of the Wood') south of the Crossings of Teiglin to 
Bar-erib some leagues south of Arnon Rudh in the once fertile land between Narog and 
the Meres of Sirion. From all these places men could see the summit of Arnon Rudh, and 
by signals receive tidings and commands. 

In this way, before the summer had passed, the following of Turin had swelled to a great 
force, and the power of Angband was thrown back. Word of this came even to 
Nargothrond, and many there grew restless, saying that if an outlaw could do such hurt to 



the Enemy, what might not the Lord of Narog do. But Orodreth King of Nargothrond 
would not change his counsels. In all things he followed Thingol, with whom he 
exchanged messengers by secret ways; and he was a wise lord, according to the wisdom 
of those who considered first their own people, and how long they might preserve their 
life and wealth against the lust of the North. 

Therefore he allowed none of his people to go to Turin, and he sent messengers to say to 
him that in all that he might do or devise in his war he should not set foot in the land of 
Nargothrond, nor drive Ores thither. But help other than in arms he offered to the Two 
Captains, should they have need (and in this, it is thought, he was moved by Thingol and 
Melian). 

Then Morgoth withheld his hand; though he made frequent feint of attack, so that by easy 
victory the confidence of these rebels might become overweening. As it proved indeed. 
For Turin now gave the name of Dor-Cuarthol to all the land between Teiglin and the 
west march of Doriath; and claiming the lordship of it he named himself anew, Gorthol, 
the Dread Helm; and his heart was high. But to Beleg it seemed now that the Helm had 
wrought otherwise with Turin than he had hoped; and looking into the days to come he 
was troubled in mind. 

One day as summer was wearing on he and Turin were sitting in the Echad resting after a 
long affray and march. Turin said then to Beleg: ’Why are you sad, and thoughtful? Does 
not all go well, since you returned to me? Has not my purpose proved good?’ 

’All is well now,' said Beleg. 'Our enemies are still surprised and afraid. And still good 
days lie before us - for a while.’ 

'And what then?' said Turin. 

'Winter,' said Beleg. 'And after that another year, for those who live to see it.’ 

'And what then?' 

'The wrath of Angband. We have burned the fingertips of the Black Hand - no more. It 
will not withdraw.' 

'But is not the wrath of Angband our purpose and delight?' said Turin. 

'What else would you have me do?’ 

'You know full well,' said Beleg. 'But of that road you have forbidden me to speak. But 
hear me now. A king or the lord of a great host has many needs. He must have a secure 
refuge; and he must have wealth, and many whose work is not in war. With numbers 
comes the need of food, more than the wild will furnish to hunters. And there comes the 
passing of secrecy. Arnon Rudh is a good place for a few - it has eyes and ears. But it 



stands alone, and is seen far off; and no great force is needed to surround it - unless a host 
defends it, greater far than ours is yet or than it is likely ever to be.’ 


’Nonetheless, I will be the captain of my own host,' said Turin; 'and if I fall, then I fall. 
Here I stand in the path of Morgoth, and while I so stand he cannot use the southward 
road.’ 

Report of the Dragon-helm in the land west of Sirion came swiftly to the ear of Morgoth, 
and he laughed, for now Turin was revealed to him again, who had long been lost in the 
shadows and under the veils of Melian. Yet he began to fear that Turin would grow to 
such a power that the curse that he had laid upon him would become void, and he would 
escape the doom that had been designed for him, or else that he might retreat to Doriath 
and be lost to his sight again. Now therefore he had a mind to seize Turin and afflict him 
even as his father, to torment him and enslave him. 

Beleg had spoken truly when he said to Turin that they had but scorched the fingers of 
the Black Hand, and that it would not withdraw. But Morgoth concealed his designs, and 
for that time contented himself with the sending out of his most skilled scouts; and ere 
long Arnon Rudh was surrounded by spies, lurking unobserved in the wilderness and 
making no move against the parties of men that went in and out. 

But Mhn was aware of the presence of Ores in the lands about Arnon Rudh, and the 
hatred that he bore to Beleg led him now in his darkened heart to an evil resolve. One day 
in the waning of the year he told the men in Bar-en-Danwedh that he was going with his 
son Ibun to search for roots for their winter store; but his true purpose was to seek out the 
servants of Morgoth, and to lead them to Turin's hiding-place.* Nevertheless he 
attempted to impose certain conditions on the Ores, who laughed at him, but Mhn said 
that they knew little if they believed that they could gain anything from a Petty-dwarf by 
torture. Then they asked him what these conditions might be, and Mhn declared his 
demands: that they pay him the weight in iron of each man whom they caught or slew, 
but of Turin and Beleg in gold; that Mhn’s house, when rid of Turin and his company, be 
left to him, and himself unmolested; that Beleg be left behind, bound, for Mhn to deal 
with; and that Turin be let go free. 

To these conditions the emissaries of Morgoth readily agreed, with no intention of 
fulfilling either the first or the second. The Ore-captain thought that the fate of Beleg * 
But another tale is told, which has it that Mim did not encounter the Ores with deliberate 
intent. It was the capture of his son and their threat to torture him that led Mim to his 
treachery, might well be left to Mim; but as to letting Turin go free, 'alive to Angband’ 
were his orders. While agreeing to the conditions he insisted that they keep Ibun as 
hostage; and then Mim became afraid, and tried to back out of his undertaking, or else to 
escape. But the Ores had his son, and so Mim was obliged to guide them to Bar-en- 
Danwedh. Thus was the House of Ransom betrayed. 

It has been told that the stony mass that was the crown or cap of Arnon Rudh had a bare 
or flattened top, but that steep as were its sides men could reach the summit by climbing a 



stair cut into the rock, leading up from the shelf or terrace before the entrance to Mim’s 
house. On the summit watchmen were set, and they gave warning of the approach of the 
enemies. But these, guided by Mim, came onto the level shelf before the doors, and Turin 
and Beleg were driven back to the entrance of Bar-en-Danwedh. Some of the men who 
tried to climb up the steps cut in the rock were shot down by the arrows of the Ores. 

Turin and Beleg retreated into the cave, and rolled a great stone across the passage. In 
these straits Androg revealed to them the hidden stair leading to the flat summit of Arnon 
Rudh which he had found when lost in the caves, as has been told. Then Turin and Beleg 
with many of their men went up by this stair and came out on the summit, surprising 
those few of the Ores who had already come there by the outer path, and driving them 
over the edge. For a little while they held off the Ores climbing up the rock, but they had 
no shelter on the bare summit, and many were shot from below. Most valiant of these was 
Androg, who fell mortally wounded by an arrow at the head of the outside stair. 

Then Turin and Beleg with the ten men left to them drew back to the centre of the 
summit, where there was a standing stone, and making a ring about it they defended 
themselves until all were slain save Beleg and Turin, for over them the Ores cast nets. 
Turin was bound and carried off; Beleg who was wounded was bound likewise, but he 
was laid on the ground with wrists and ankles tied to iron pins driven in to the rock. 

Now the Ores, finding the issue of the secret stair, left the summit and entered Bar-en- 
Danwedh, which they defiled and ravaged. They did not find Mim, lurking in his caves, 
and when they had departed from Amon Rudh Mim appeared on the summit, and going 
to where Beleg lay prostrate and unmoving he gloated over him while he sharpened a 
kn ife. 

But Mim and Beleg were not the only living beings on that stony height. 

Androg, though himself wounded to the death, crawled among the dead bodies towards 
them, and seizing a sword he thrust it at the Dwarf. 

Shrieking in fear Mim ran to the brink of the cliff and disappeared: he fled down a steep 
and difficult goafs path that was known to him. But Androg putting forth his last strength 
cut through the wristbands and fetters that bound Beleg, and so released him; but dying 
he said: 'My hurts are too deep even for your healing.’ 



CHAPTER IX 


THE DEATH OF BELEG 


Beleg sought among the dead for Turin, to bury him; but he could not discover his body. 
He knew then that Hurin's son was still alive, and taken to Angband; but he remained 
perforce in Bar-en-Danwedh until his wounds were healed. He set out then with little 
hope to try to find the trail of the Ores, and he came upon their tracks near the Crossings 
of Teiglin. There they divided, some passing along the eaves of the Forest of Brethil 
towards the Ford of Brithiach, while others turned away westwards; and it seemed plain 
to Beleg that he must follow those that went direct with greatest speed to Angband, 
making for the Pass of Anach. Therefore he journeyed on through Dimbar, and up to the 
Pass of Anach in Ered Gorgoroth, the Mountains of Terror, and so to the highlands of 
Taur-nu-Fuin, the Forest under Night, a region of dread and dark enchantment, of 
wandering and despair. 

Benighted in that evil land, it chanced that Beleg saw a small light among the trees, and 
going towards it he found an Elf, lying asleep beneath a great dead tree: beside his head 
was a lamp, from which the covering had slipped off. Then Beleg woke the sleeper, and 
gave him lembas, and asked him what fate had brought him to this terrible place; and he 
named himself Gwindor, son of Guilin. 

Grieving Beleg looked at him, for Gwindor was but a bent and timid shadow of his 
former shape and mood, when in the Battle of Unnumbered Tears that lord of 
Nargothrond rode to the very doors of Angband, and there was taken. For few of the 
Noldor whom Morgoth took captive were put to death, because of their skill in mining for 
metals and gems; and Gwindor was not slain, but put to labour in the mines of the North. 

These Noldor possessed many of the Feanorian lamps, which were crystals hung in a fine 
chain net, the crystals being ever-shining with an inner blue radiance marvellous for 
finding the way in the darkness of night or in tunnels; of these lamps they themselves did 
not know the secret. Many of the mining Elves thus escaped from the darkness of the 
mines, for they were able to bore their way out; but Gwindor received a small sword from 
one who worked in the forges, and when working in a stone-gang turned suddenly on the 
guards. He escaped, but with one hand cut off; and now he lay exhausted under the great 
pines of Taur-nu-Fuin. 

From Gwindor Beleg learned that the small company of Ores ahead of them, from whom 
he had hidden, had no captives, and were going with speed: an advance guard, perhaps, 
bearing report to Angband. At this news Beleg despaired: for he guessed that the tracks 
that he had seen turning away westwards after the Crossings of Teiglin were those of a 
greater host, who had in ore-fashion gone marauding in the lands seeking food and 



plunder, and might now be returning to Angband by way of 'the Narrow Land’, the long 
defile of Sirion, much further to the west. If this were so, his sole hope lay in returning to 
the Ford of Brithiach, and then going north to Tol Sirion. But scarcely had he determined 
on this than they heard the noise of a great host approaching through the forest from the 
south; and hiding in the boughs of a tree they watched the servants of Morgoth pass, 
moving slowly, laden with booty and captives, surrounded by wolves. And they saw 
Turin with chained hands being driven on with whips. 

Then Beleg told him of his own errand in Taur-nu-Fuin; and Gwindor sought to dissuade 
him from his quest, saying that he would but join Turin in the anguish that awaited him. 
But Beleg would not abandon Turin, and despairing himself he aroused hope again in 
Gwindor’s heart; and together they went on, following the Ores until they came out of the 
forest on the high slopes that ran down to the barren dunes of the Anfauglith. There 
within sight of the peaks of Thangorodrim the Ores made their encampment in a bare 
dale, and set wolf-sentinels all about its rim. There they fell to carousing and feasting on 
their booty; and after tormenting their prisoners most fell drunkenly asleep. By that time 
day was failing and it became very dark. A great storm rode up out of the West, and 
thunder rumbled far off as Beleg and Gwindor crept towards the camp. 

When all in the camp were sleeping Beleg took up his bow and in the darkness shot four 
of the wolf-sentinels on the south side, one by one and silently. Then in great peril they 
entered in, and they found Turin fettered hand and foot and tied to a tree. All about 
knives that had been cast at him by his tormentors were embedded in the trunk, but he 
was not hurt; and he was senseless in a drugged stupor or swooned in a sleep of utter 
weariness. Then Beleg and Gwindor cut the bonds from the tree, and bore Turin out of 
the camp. But he was too heavy to carry far, and they could go no further than to a thicket 
of thorn trees high on the slopes above the camp. There they laid him down; and now the 
storm drew nearer, and lightning flashed on Thangorodrim. Beleg drew his sword 
Anglachel, and with it he cut the fetters that bound Turin; but fate was that day more 
strong, for the blade of Eol the Dark Elf slipped in his hand, and pricked Turin's foot. 

Then Turin was roused into a sudden wakefulness of rage and fear, and seeing a fonn 
bending over him in the gloom with a naked blade in hand he leapt up with a great cry, 
believing that Ores were come again to torment him; and grappling with him in the 
darkness he seized Anglachel, and slew Beleg Cuthalion thinking him a foe. 

But as he stood, finding himself free, and ready to sell his life dearly against imagined 
foes, there came a great flash of lightning above them, and in its light he looked down on 
Beleg's face. Then Turin stood stonestill and silent, staring on that dreadful death, 
knowing what he had done; and so terrible was his face, lit by the lightning that flickered 
all about them, that Gwindor cowered down upon the ground and dared not raise his eyes. 

But now in the camp beneath the Ores were roused, both by the storm and by Turin's cry, 
and discovered that Turin was gone; but no search was made for him, for they were filled 
with terror by the thunder that came out of the West, believing that it was sent against 
them by the great Enemies beyond the Sea. Then a wind arose, and great rains fell, and 



torrents swept down from the heights of Taur-nu-Fuin; and though Gwindor cried out to 
Turin, warning him of their utmost peril, he made no answer, but sat unmoving and 
unweeping beside the body of Beleg Cuthalion, lying in the dark forest slain by his hand 
even as he cut the bonds of thraldom from him. 

When morning came the storm was passed away eastward over Lothlann, and the sun of 
autumn rose hot and bright; but the Ores hating this almost as much as the thunder, and 
believing that Turin would have fled far from that place and all trace of his flight be 
washed away, they departed in haste, eager to return to Angband. Far off Gwindor saw 
them marching northward over the steaming sands of Anfauglith. Thus it came to pass 
that they returned to Morgoth empty-handed, and left behind them the son of Hurin, who 
sat crazed and unwitting on the slopes of Taur-nu-Fuin, bearing a burden heavier than 
their bonds. 

Then Gwindor roused Turin to aid him in the burial of Beleg, and he rose as one that 
walked in sleep; and together they laid Beleg in a shallow grave, and placed beside him 
Belthronding his great bow, that was made of black yew-wood. But the dread sword 
Anglachel Gwindor took, saying that it were better that it should take vengeance on the 
servants of Morgoth than lie useless in the earth; and he took also the lembas of Melian to 
strengthen them in the wild. 

Thus ended Beleg Strongbow, truest of friends, greatest in skill of all that harboured in 
the woods of Beleriand in the Elder Days, at the hand of him whom he most loved; and 
that grief was graven on the face of Turin and never faded. 

But courage and strength were renewed in the Elf of Nargothrond, and departing from 
Taur-nu-Fuin he led Turin far away. Never once as they wandered together on long and 
grievous paths did Turin speak, and he walked as one without wish or purpose, while the 
year waned and winter drew on over the northern lands. But Gwindor was ever beside 
him to guard him and guide him; and thus they passed westward over Sirion and came at 
length to the Beautiful Mere and Eithel Ivrin, the springs whence Narog rose beneath the 
Mountains of Shadow. There Gwindor spoke to Turin, saying: ’Awake, Turin son of 
Hurin! On Ivrin's lake is endless laughter. She is fed from crystal fountains unfailing, and 
guarded from defilement by Ulmo, Lord of Waters, who wrought her beauty in ancient 
days.’ Then Turin knelt and drank from that water; and suddenly he cast himself down, 
and his tears were unloosed at last, and he was healed of his madness. 

There he made a song for Beleg, and he named it Laer Cu Beleg, the Song of the Great 
Bow, singing it aloud heedless of peril. And Gwindor gave the sword Anglachel into his 
hands, and Turin knew that it was heavy and strong and had great power; but its blade 
was black and dull and its edges blunt. Then Gwindor said: ’This is a strange blade, and 
unlike any that I have seen in Middle-earth. It mourns for Beleg even as you do. 


But be comforted; for I return to Nargothrond of the House of Finarfin, where I was born 
and dwelt before my grief. You shall come with me, and be healed and renewed.’ 



’Who are you?' said Turin. 


'A wandering Elf, a thrall escaped, whom Beleg met and comforted,' said Gwindor. 'Yet 
once I was Gwindor son of Guilin, a lord of Nargothrond, until I went to the Nirnaeth 
Amoediad, and was enslaved in Angband.’ 

'Then have you seen Hurin son of Galdor, the warrior of Dor-lomin?' said Turin. 

'I have not seen him,' said Gwindor. 'But the rumour runs through Angband that he still 
defies Morgoth; and Morgoth has laid a curse upon him and all his kin.’ 

'That I do believe,' said Turin. 

And now they arose, and departing from Eithel Ivrin they journeyed southward along the 
ha nk s of Narog, until they were taken by scouts of the Elves and brought as prisoners to 
the hidden stronghold. 

Thus did Turin come to Nargothrond. 



CHAPTER X 


TURIN IN NARGOTHROND 


At first his own people did not know Gwindor, who went out young and strong, and 
returned now seeming as one of the aged among mortal Men, because of his tonnents and 
his labours; and now also he was maimed. But Finduilas daughter of Orodreth the King 
knew him and welcomed him, for she had loved him, and indeed they were betrothed, 
before the Nirnaeth, and so greatly did Gwindor love her beauty that he named her 
Faelivrin, which is the sheen of the sun upon the pools of Ivrin. 

Thus Gwindor came home, and for his sake Turin was admitted with him; for Gwindor 
said that he was a valiant man, dear friend of Beleg Ciithalion of Doriath. But when 
Gwindor would tell his name Turin checked him, saying: 'I am Agarwaen, the son of 
Umarth (which is the Bloodstained, son of Ill-fate), a hunter in the woods.’ But though 
the Elves guessed that he took these names because of the slaying of his friend (not 
knowing other reasons), they questioned him no more. 

The sword Anglachel was forged anew for him by the cunning smiths of Nargothrond, 
and though ever black its edges shone with pale fire. Then Turin himself became kn own 
in Nargothrond as Monnegil, the Black Sword, for the rumour of his deeds with that 
weapon; but he named the sword Gurthang, Iron of Death. 

Because of his prowess and his skill in warfare with Ores Turin found favour with 
Orodreth, and was admitted to his council. Now Turin had no liking for the manner of 
fighting of the Elves of Nargothrond, of ambush and stealth and secret arrow, and he 
urged that it be abandoned, and that they should use their strength to attack the servants 
of the Enemy, to open battle and pursuit. But Gwindor spoke ever against Turin in this 
matter in the council of the King, saying that he had been in Angband and had had a 
glimpse of the power of Morgoth, and had some inkling of his designs. 'Petty victories 
will prove profitless at the last,' he said; 'for thus Morgoth leams where the boldest of his 
enemies are to be found, and gathers strength great enough to destroy them. All the might 
of the Elves and Edain united sufficed only to contain him, and to gain the peace of a 
siege; long indeed, but only so long as Morgoth bided his time before he broke the 
leaguer; and never again can such a union be made. Only in secrecy lies hope of survival. 
Until the Valar come.' 

'The Valar!' said Turin. 'They have forsaken you, and they hold Men in scorn. What use 
to look westward across the endless Sea to a dying sunset in the West? There is but one 
Vala with whom we have to do, and that is Morgoth; and if in the end we cannot 
overcome him, at least we can hurt him and hinder him. For victory is victory, however 
small, nor is its worth only from what follows from it. But it is expedient also. 



Secrecy is not finally possible: arms are the only wall against Morgoth. 


If you do nothing to halt him, all Beleriand will fall under his shadow before many years 
are passed, and then one by one he will smoke you out of your earths. And what then? A 
pitiable remnant will fly south and west, to cower on the shores of the Sea, caught 
between Morgoth and Osse. Better then to win a time of glory, though it be short-lived; 
for the end will be no worse. You speak of secrecy, and say that therein lies the only 
hope; but could you ambush and waylay every scout and spy of Morgoth to the last and 
least, so that none came ever back with tidings to Angband, yet from that he would learn 
that you lived and guess where. And this also I say: though mortal Men have little life 
beside the span of the Elves, they would rather spend it in battle than fly or submit. The 
defiance of Hurin Thalion is a great deed; and though Morgoth slay the doer he cannot 
make the deed not to have been. Even the Lords of the West will honour it; and is it not 
written into the history of Arda, which neither Morgoth nor Manwe can unwrite?' 

'You speak of high things,' Gwindor answered, 'and plain it is that you have lived among 
the Eldar. But a darkness is on you if you set Morgoth and Manwe together, or speak of 
the Valar as the foes of Elves and Men; for the Valar scorn nothing, and least of all the 
Children of Iluvatar. 

Nor do you know all the hopes of the Eldar. It is a prophecy among us that one day a 
messenger from Middle-earth will come through the shadows to Valinor, and Manwe will 
hear, and Mandos relent. For that time shall we not attempt to preserve the seed of the 
Noldor, and of the Edain also? And Cirdan dwells now in the South, and there is building 
of ships; but what know you of ships, or of the Sea? You think of yourself and of your 
own glory, and bid us each do likewise; but we must think of others beside ourselves, for 
not all can fight and fall, and those we must keep from war and ruin, while we can.' 

'Then send them to your ships, while there is yet time,' said Turin. 

'They will not be parted from us,' said Gwindor, 'even could Cirdan sustain them. We 
must abide together as long as we may, and not court death.’ 

'All this I have answered,' said Turin. 'Valiant defence of the borders and hard blows ere 
the enemy gathers; in that course lies the best hope of your long abiding together. And do 
those that you speak of love such skulkers in the woods, hunting strays like a wolf, better 
than one who puts on his helm and figured shield, and drives away the foe, be they far 
greater than all his host? At least the women of the Edain do not. They did not hold back 
the men from the Nirnaeth Amoediad.' 

'But they suffered greater woe than if that field had not been fought,' said Gwindor. 

But Turin advanced greatly in the favour of Orodreth, and he became the chief counsellor 
of the King, who submitted all things to his advice. In that time the Elves of Nargothrond 
forsook their secrecy, and great store of weapons were made; and by the counsel of Turin 



the Noldor built a mighty bridge over the Narog from the Doors of Felagund for the 
swifter passage of their arms, since war was now chiefly east of Narog in the Guarded 
Plain. As its north-march Nargothrond now held the 'Debatable Land' about the sources 
of Ginglith, Narog, and the fringes of the Woods of Nuath. Between Nenning and Narog 
no Ore came; and east of Narog their realm went to the Teiglin and the borders of the 
Moors of the Nibin-noeg. 

Gwindor fell into dishonour, for he was no longer forward in arms, and his strength was 
small; and the pain of his maimed left arm was often upon him. But Turin was young, 
and only now reached his full manhood; and he was in truth the son of Morwen 
Eledhwen to look upon: tall, dark-haired and pale-skinned, with grey eyes, and his face 
more beautiful than any other among mortal men, in the Elder Days. His speech and 
bearing were those of the ancient kingdom of Doriath, and even among the Elves he 
might be taken at first meeting for one from the great houses of the Noldor. So valiant 
was Turin, and so exceedingly skilled in arms, especially with sword and shield, that the 
Elves said that he could not be slain, save by mischance, or an evil arrow from afar. 

Therefore they gave him dwarf-mail, to guard him; and in a grim mood he found in the 
annouries a dwarf-mask all gilded, and he put it on before battle, and his enemies fled 
before his face. 

Now that he had his way, and all went well, and he had work to do after his heart, and 
had honour in it, he was courteous to all, and less grim than of old, so that well nigh all 
hearts were turned to him; and many called him Adanedhel, the Elf-man. But most of all 
Finduilas the daughter of Orodreth found her heart moved whenever he came near, or 
was in hall. She was golden-haired after the manner of the house of Finarfin, and Turin 
began to take pleasure in the sight of her and in her company; for she reminded him of his 
kindred and the women of Dor-lomin in his father's house. 

At first he met her only when Gwindor was by; but after a while she sought him out, so 
that they met at times alone, though it seemed to be by chance. Then she would question 
him about the Edain, of whom she had seen few and seldom, and about his country and 
his kin. 

Then Turin spoke freely to her concerning these things, though he did not name the land 
of his birth, nor any of his kindred; and on a time he said to her: 'I had a sister, Lalaith, or 
so I named her; and of her you put me in mind. But Lalaith was a child, a yellow flower 
in the green grass of spring; and had she lived she would now, maybe, have become 
dimmed with grief. But you are queenly, and as a golden tree; I would I had a sister so 
fair.' 

'But you are kingly,' said she, 'even as the lords of the people of Fingolfin; I would I had 
a brother so valiant. And I do not think that Agarwaen is your name, nor is it fit for you, 
Adanedhel. I call you Thurin, the Secret.' 



At this Turin started, but he said: ’That is not my name; and I am not a king, for our kings 
are of the Eldar, as I am not.’ 

Now Turin marked that Gwindor's friendship grew cooler towards him; and he wondered 
also that whereas at first the woe and horror of Angband had begun to be lifted from him, 
now he seemed to slip back into care and sorrow. And he thought, it may be that he is 
grieved that I oppose his counsels, and have overcome him; I would it were not so. For he 
loved Gwindor as his guide and healer, and was filled with pity for him. But in those days 
the radiance of Finduilas also became dimmed, her footsteps slow and her face grave, and 
she grew wan and thin; and Turin perceiving this surmised that the words of Gwindor had 
set fear in her heart of what might come to pass. 

In truth Finduilas was torn in mind. For she honoured Gwindor and pitied him, and 
wished not to add one tear to his suffering; but against her will her love for Turin grew 
day by day, and she thought of Beren and Luthicn. But Turin was not like Beren! He did 
not scorn her, and was glad in her company; yet she knew that he had no love of the kind 
she wished. His mind and heart were elsewhere, by rivers in springs long past. 

Then Turin spoke to Finduilas, and said: ’Do not let the words of Gwindor affright you. 
He has suffered in the darkness of Angband; and it is hard for one so valiant to be thus 
crippled and backward perforce. He needs all solace, and a longer time for healing.’ 

'I know it well,’ she said. 

’But we will win that time for him!' said Turin. ’Nargothrond shall stand! Never again will 
Morgoth the Craven come forth from Angband, and all his reliance must be on his 
servants; thus says Melian of Doriath. 

They are the fingers of his hands; and we will smite them, and cut them off, till he draws 
back his claws. Nargothrond shall stand!’ 

'Perhaps,' said she. 'It shall stand, if you can achieve it. But have a care, Thurin; my heart 
is heavy when you go out to battle, lest Nargothrond be bereaved.’ 

Afterwards Turin sought out Gwindor, and said to him: 'Gwindor, dear friend, you are 
falling back into sadness; do not so! For your healing will come in the houses of your kin, 
and in the light of Finduilas.' 

Then Gwindor stared at Turin, but he said nothing, and his face was clouded. 

'Why do you look upon me so?' said Turin. 'Often your eyes have gazed at me strangely 
of late. How have I grieved you? I have opposed your counsels; but a man must speak as 
he sees, nor hide the truth that he believes, for any private cause. I would that we were 
one in mind; for to you I owe a great debt, and I shall not forget it.' 



’Will you not?' said Gwindor. 'Nonetheless your deeds and your counsels have changed 
my home and my kin. Your shadow lies upon them. Why should I be glad, who have lost 
all to you?' 

Turin did not understand these words, and did but guess that Gwindor begrudged him his 
place in the heart and counsels of the King. 

But Gwindor, when Turin had gone, sat alone in dark thought, and he cursed Morgoth 
who could thus pursue his enemies with woe, whithersoever they might run. 'And now at 
last,' he said, 'I believe the rumour of Angband that Morgoth has cursed Hurin and all his 
kin.' And going to find Finduilas he said to her: 'A sadness and doubt is upon you; and 
too often now I miss you, and begin to guess that you are avoiding me. Since you tell me 
not the cause, I must guess. Daughter of the house of Finarfin, let no grief lie between us; 
for though Morgoth has laid my life in ruin, you still I love. But go whither love leads 
you; for I am become unfit to wed you; and neither my prowess nor my counsel have any 
honour more.' 

Then Finduilas wept. 'Weep not yet!' said Gwindor. 'But beware lest you have cause. Not 
fitting is it that the Elder Children of Iluvatar should wed the Younger; nor is it wise, for 
they are brief, and soon pass, to leave us in widowhood while the world lasts. Neither 
will fate suffer it, unless it be once or twice only, for some high cause of doom that we do 
not perceive. 

'But this man is not Beren, even if he be both as fair and as brave. A doom lies on him; a 
dark doom. Enter not into it! And if you will, your love shall betray you to bitterness and 
death. For hearken to me! Though he be indeed agarwaenson of Umarth, his right name 
is Turin son of Hurin, whom Morgoth holds in Angband, and has cursed all his kin. 
Doubt not the power of Morgoth Bauglir! Is it not written in me?' 

Then Finduilas rose, and queenly indeed she looked. 'Your eyes are dimmed, Gwindor,' 
she said. 'You do not see or understand what has here come to pass. Must I now be put to 
double shame to reveal the truth to you? For I love you, Gwindor, and I am ashamed that 
I love you not more, but have taken a love even greater, from which I cannot escape. I did 
not seek it, and long I put it aside. But if I have pity for your hurts, have pity on mine. 
Turin loves me not, nor will.’ 

'You say this,' said Gwindor, 'to take the blame from him whom you love. 

Why does he seek you out, and sit long with you, and come ever more glad away?' 

'Because he also needs solace,' said Finduilas, 'and is bereaved of his kin. You both have 
your needs. But what of Finduilas? Now is it not enough that I must confess myself to 
you unloved, but that you should say that I speak so to deceive?’ 


'Nay, a woman is not easily deceived in such a case,' said Gwindor. 'Nor will you find 
many who will deny that they are loved, if that is true.’ 



’If any of us three be faithless, it is I: but not in will. But what of your doom and rumours 
of Angband? What of death and destruction? The Adanedhel is mighty in the tale of the 
World, and his stature shall reach yet to Morgoth in some far day to come.’ 


'He is proud,' said Gwindor. 

'But also he is merciful,' said Finduilas. 'He is not yet awake, but still pity can ever pierce 
his heart, and he will never deny it. Pity maybe shall be ever the only entry. But he does 
not pity me. He holds me in awe, as were I both his mother and a queen.’ 

Maybe Finduilas spoke truly, seeing with the keen eyes of the Eldar. And now Turin, not 
knowing what had passed between Gwindor and Finduilas, was ever gentler towards her 
as she seemed more sad. But on a time Finduilas said to him: 'Thurin Adanedhel, why did 
you hide your name from me? Had I known who you were I should not have honoured 
you less, but I should better have understood your grief.’ 

'What do you mean?' he said. 'Whom do you make me?' 

'Turin son of Hurin Thalion, captain of the North.’ 

Now when Turin learned from Finduilas of what had passed, he was wrathful, and he said 
to Gwindor: 'In love I hold you for rescue and safe-keeping. But now you have done ill to 
me, friend, to betray my right name, and call down my doom upon me, from which I 
would lie hid.’ 

But Gwindor answered: 'The doom lies in yourself, not in your name.’ 

In that time of respite and hope, when because of the deeds of the Mormegil the power of 
Morgoth was stemmed west of Sirion, and all the woods had peace, Morwen fled at last 
from Dor-lomin with Nienor her daughter, and adventured the long journey to Thingol's 
halls. There new grief awaited her, for she found Turin gone, and to Doriath there had 
come no tidings since the Dragon-helm had vanished from the lands west of Sirion; but 
Morwen remained in Doriath with Nienor as guests of Thingol and Melian, and were 
treated with honour. 



CHAPTER XI 


THE FALL OF NARGOTHROND 


When five years had passed since Turin came to Nargothrond, in the spring of the year, 
there came two Elves, and they named themselves Gelrnir and Anninas, of the people of 
Finarfin; and they said that they had an errand to the Lord of Nargothrond. Turin now 
commanded all the forces of Nargothrond, and ruled all matters of war; indeed he was 
become stern and proud, and would order all things as he wished or thought good. They 
were brought therefore before Turin; but Gelrnir said: 'It is to Orodreth, Finarfin's son, 
that we would speak.’ 

And when Orodreth came, Gelrnir said to him: 'Lord, we were of Angrod's people, and 
we have wandered far since the Nimaeth; but of late we have dwelt among Cirdan's 
following by the Mouths of Sirion. And on a day he called us, and bade us go to you; for 
Ulmo himself, the Lord of Waters, had appeared to him and warned him of great peril 
that draws near to Nargothrond.’ 

But Orodreth was wary, and he answered: ’Why then do you come hither out of the 
North? Or perhaps you had other errands also?' 

Then Anninas said: 'Yes, lord. Ever since the Nirnaeth I have sought for the hidden 
kingdom of Turgon, and I have found it not; and in this search I fear now that I have 
delayed our errand hither over long. For Cirdan sent us along the coast by ship, for 
secrecy and speed, and we were put ashore in Drengist. But among the sea-folk were 
some that came south in past years as messengers from Turgon, and it seemed to me from 
their guarded speech that maybe Turgon dwells still in the North, and not in the South as 
most believe. But we have found neither sign nor rumour of what we sought.’ 

'Why do you seek Turgon?' said Orodreth. 

'Because it is said that his kingdom shall stand longest against Morgoth,' answered 
Anninas. And these words seemed to Orodreth ill-omened, and he was displeased. 

'Then tarry not in Nargothrond,’ said he; 'for here you will hear no news of Turgon. And I 
need none to teach me that Nargothrond stands in peril.’ 

'Be not angered, lord,’ said Gelrnir, 'if we answer your questions with truth. And our 
wandering from the straight path hither has not been fruitless, for we have passed beyond 
the reach of your furthest scouts; we have traversed Dor-lomin and all the lands under the 
eaves of Ered Wethrin, and we have explored the Pass of Sirion spying out the ways of 



the Enemy. There is a great gathering of Ores and evil creatures in those regions, and a 
host is mustering about Sauron’s Isle.’ 

’I know it,' said Turin. 'Your news is stale. If the message of Cirdan was to any purpose, it 
should have come sooner.’ 

'At least, lord, you shall hear the message now,' said Gelrnir to Orodreth. 'Hear then the 
words of the Lord of Waters! Thus he spoke to Cirdan: "The Evil of the North has defiled 
the springs of Sirion, and my power withdraws from the fingers of the flowing waters. 

But a worse thing is yet to come forth. Say therefore to the Lord of Nargothrond: 

Shut the doors of the fortress, and go not abroad. Cast the stones of your pride into the 
loud river, that the creeping evil may not find the gate."’ 

These words seemed dark to Orodreth, and he turned as ever to Turin for counsel. But 
Turin mistrusted the messengers, and he said in scorn: 'What does Cirdan know of our 
wars, who dwell nigh to the Enemy? Let the mariner look to his ships! But if in truth the 
Lord of Waters would send us counsel, let him speak more plainly. Otherwise to one 
trained in war it will still seem better in our case to muster our strength, and go boldly to 
meet our foes, ere they come too nigh.’ 

Then Gelrnir bowed before Orodreth, and said: 'I have spoken as I was bidden, lord'; and 
he turned away. But Arminas said to Turin: 'Are you indeed of the House of Hador, as I 
have heard said?' 

'Here I am named Agarwaen, the Black Sword of Nargothrond,' answered Turin. 'You 
deal much, it seems, in guarded speech, friend Arminas. It is well that Turgon’s secret is 
hid from you, or soon it would be heard in Angband. A man's name is his own, and 
should the son of Hurin leam that you have betrayed him when he would be hid, then 
may Morgoth take you and bum out your tongue!’ 

Anninas was dismayed by the black wrath of Turin; but Gelrnir said: 'He shall not be 
betrayed by us, Agarwaen. Are we not in council behind closed doors, where speech may 
be plainer? And Arminas, I deem, questioned you, since it is known to all that dwell by 
the Sea that Ulmo has great love for the House of Hador, and some say that Hurin and 
Huor his brother came once into the Hidden Realm.' 

'If that were so, then he would speak of it to none, neither the great nor the less, and least 
of all to his son in childhood,' answered Turin. 

'Therefore I do not believe that Anninas asked this of me in order to leam aught of 
Turgon. I mistrust such messengers of mischief.’ 

'Save your mistrust!' said Arminas in anger. 'Gelrnir mistakes me. I asked because I 
doubted what here seems believed; for little indeed do you resemble the kin of Hador, 
whatever your name.’ 



’And what do you know of them?' said Turin. 


'Hurin I have seen,' answered Anninas, 'and his fathers before him. And in the wastes of 
Dor-lomin I met with Tuor, son of Huor, Hurin' s brother; and he is like his fathers, as you 
are not.’ 

'That may be,' said Turin, 'though of Tuor I have heard no word ere now. 

But if my head be dark and not golden, of that I am not ashamed. For I am not the first of 
sons in the likeness of his mother; and I come through Morwen Eledhwen of the House of 
Beor and the kindred of Beren Camlost.’ 

'I spoke not of the difference between the black and the gold,' said Anninas. 'But others 
of the House of Hador bear themselves otherwise, and Tuor among them. For they use 
courtesy, and they listen to good counsel, holding the Lords of the West in awe. But you, 
it seems, will take counsel with your own wisdom, or with your sword only; and you 
speak haughtily. And I say to you, Agarwaen Mormegil, that if you do so, other shall be 
your doom than one of the Houses of Hador and Beor might look for.’ 

'Other it has ever been,' answered Turin. 'And if, as it seems, I must bear the hate of 
Morgoth because of the valour of my father, shall I also endure the taunts and ill-boding 
of a runagate from war, though he claim the kinship of kings? Get you back to the safe 
shores of the Sea!' 

Then Gelrnir and Anninas departed, and went back to the South; but despite Turin's 
taunts they would gladly have awaited battle beside their kin, and they went only because 
Cirdan had bidden them under the command of Ulmo to bring back word to him of 
Nargothrond and of the speeding of their enand there. And Orodreth was much troubled 
by the words of the messengers; but all the more fell became the mood of Turin, and he 
would by no means listen to their counsels, and least of all would he suffer the great 
bridge to be cast down. For so much at least of the words of Ulmo were read aright. 

Soon after the departure of the messengers Handir Lord of Brethil was slain; for the Ores 
invaded his land, seeking to secure the Crossings of Teiglin for their further advance. 
Handir gave them battle, but the Men of Brethil were worsted and driven back into their 
woods. The Ores did not pursue them, for they had achieved their purpose for that time; 
and they continued to muster their strength in the Pass of Sirion. 

In the autumn of the year, biding his hour, Morgoth loosed upon the people of Narog the 
great host that he had long prepared; and Glaurung the Father of Dragons passed over 
Anfauglith, and came thence into the north vales of Sirion and there did great evil. Under 
the shadows of Ered Wethrin, leading a great anny of Ores in his train, he defiled the 
Eithel Ivrin, and thence he passed into the realm of Nargothrond, burning the Talath 
Dimen, the Guarded Plain, between Narog and Teiglin. 



Then the warriors of Nargothrond went forth, and tall and terrible on that day looked 
Turin, and the heart of the host was uplifted as he rode on the right hand of Orodreth. But 
greater far was the host of Morgoth than any scouts had told, and none but Turin 
defended by his dwarf-mask could withstand the approach of Glaurung. 

The Elves were driven back and defeated on the field of Tumhalad; and there all the pride 
and host of Nargothrond withered away. Orodreth the King was slain in the forefront of 
the battle, and Gwindor son of Guilin was wounded to the death. But Turin came to his 
aid, and all fled before him; and he bore Gwindor out of the rout, and escaping to a wood 
there laid him on the grass. 

Then Gwindor said to Turin: 'Let bearing pay for bearing! But ill-fated was mine, and 
vain is yours; for my body is marred beyond healing, and I must leave Middle-earth. And 
though I love you, son of Hurin, yet I rue the day that I took you from the Ores. But for 
your prowess and your pride, still I should have love and life, and Nargothrond should 
yet stand a while. Now if you love me, leave me! Haste you to Nargothrond, and save 
Finduilas. And this last I say to you: she alone stands between you and your doom. If you 
fail her, it shall not fail to find you. 

Farewell!' 

Then Turin sped back to Nargothrond, mustering such of the rout as he met with on the 
way; and the leaves fell from the trees in a great wind as they went, for the autumn was 
passing to a dire winter. But Glaurung and his host of Ores were there before him, 
because of his rescue of Gwindor, and they came suddenly, ere those that were left on 
guard were aware of what had befallen on the field of Tumhalad. In that day the bridge 
that Turin had caused to be built over Narog proved an evil; for it was great and mightily 
made and could not swiftly be destroyed, and thus the enemy came readily over the deep 
river, and Glaurung came in full fire against the Doors of Felagund, and overthrew them, 
and passed within. 

And even as Turin came up the ghastly sack of Nargothrond was well-nigh achieved. The 
Ores had slain or driven off all that remained in arms, and they were even then 
ransacking the great halls and chambers, plundering and destroying; but those of the 
women and maidens that were not burned or slain they had herded on the terrace before 
the doors, as slaves to be taken to Angband. Upon this ruin and woe Turin came, and 
none could withstand him; or would not, though he struck down all before him, and 
passed over the bridge, and hewed his way towards the captives. 

And now he stood alone, for the few that had followed him had fled into hiding. But in 
that moment Glaurung the fell issued from the gaping Doors of Felagund, and lay behind, 
between Turin and the bridge. Then suddenly he spoke by the evil spirit that was in him, 
saying: 'Hail, son of Hurin. Well met!' 


Then Turin sprang about, and strode against him, and fire was in his eyes, and the edges 
of Gurthang shone as with flame. But Glaurung withheld his blast, and opened wide his 



serpent-eyes and gazed upon Turin. Without fear Turin looked in those eyes as he raised 
up his sword; and straightway he fell under the dreadful spell of the dragon, and was as 
one turned to stone. Thus long they stood unmoving, silent before the great Doors of 
Felagund. Then Glaurung spoke again, taunting Turin. 'Evil have been all your ways, son 
of Hurin,' said he. 'Thankless fosterling, outlaw, slayer of your friend, thief of love, 
usurper of Nargothrond, captain foolhardy, and deserter of your kin. As thralls your 
mother and your sister live in Dor-lomin, in misery and want. You are arrayed as a 
prince, but they go in rags. For you they yearn, but you care not for that. Glad may your 
father be to learn that he has such a son: as learn he shall.’ And Turin being under the 
spell of Glaurung hearkened to his words, and he saw himself as in a mirror misshapen 
by malice, and he loathed what he saw. 

And while he was yet held by the eyes of Glaurung in tonnent of mind, and could not stir, 
at a sign from the Dragon the Ores drove away the herded captives, and they passed nigh 
to Turin and went over the bridge. 

And among them was Finduilas, and she held out her arms to Turin, and called him by 
name. But not until her cries and the wailing of the captives was lost upon the northward 
road did Glaurung release Turin, and he might not stop his ears against that voice that 
haunted him after. 

Then suddenly Glaurung withdrew his glance, and waited; and Turin stirred slowly as 
one waking from a hideous dream. Then coming to himself with a loud cry he sprang 
upon the Dragon. But Glaurung laughed, saying: ’If you wish to be slain, I will slay you 
gladly. But small help will that be to Morwen and Nienor. No heed did you give to the 
cries of the Elf-woman. Will you deny also the bond of your blood?’ 

But Turin drawing back his sword stabbed at his eyes; and Glaurung coiling back swiftly 
towered above him, and said: ’Nay! At least you are valiant. Beyond all whom I have 
met. And they lie who say that we of our part do not honour the valour of foes. See now! 

I offer you freedom. Go to your kin, if you can. Get you gone! And if Elf or Man be left 
to make tale of these days, then surely in scorn they will name you, if you spurn this gift.’ 

Then Turin, being yet bemused by the eyes of the dragon, as if he were treating with a foe 
that could know pity, believed the words of Glaurung, and turning away he sped over the 
bridge. But as he went, Glaurung spoke behind him, saying in a fell voice: ’Haste you 
now, son of Hurin, to Dor-lomin! Or perhaps the Ores shall come before you, once again. 
And if you tarry for Finduilas, then never shall you see Morwen or Nienor again; and 
they will curse you.’ 

But Turin passed away on the northward road, and Glaurung laughed once more, for he 
had accomplished the errand of his Master. Then he turned to his own pleasure, and sent 
forth his blast, and burned all about him. 


But all the Ores that were busy in the sack he routed forth, and drove them away, and 
denied them their plunder even to the last thing of worth. The bridge then he broke down 



and cast into the foam of Narog; and being thus secure he gathered all the hoard and 
riches of Felagund and heaped them, and lay upon them in the innermost hall, and rested 
a while. 

And Turin hastened along the ways to the North, through the lands now desolate between 
Narog and Teiglin, and the Fell Winter came down to meet him; for that year snow fell 
ere autumn was passed, and spring came late and cold. Ever it seemed to him as he went 
that he heard the cries of Finduilas, calling his name by wood and hill, and great was his 
anguish; but his heart being hot with the lies of Glaurung, and seeing ever in his mind the 
Ores burning the house of Hurin or putting Morwen and Nienor to torment, he held on his 
way, turning never aside. 



CHAPTER XII 


THE RETURN OF TURIN TO DOR-LOMIN 


At last worn by haste and the long road (for forty leagues and more had he journeyed 
without rest) he came with the first ice of winter to the pools of Ivrin, where before he 
had been healed. But they were now only a frozen mire, and he could drink there no 
more. 

Thence he came to the passes into Dor-lomin, and snow came bitterly from the North, 
and the ways were perilous and cold. Though three and twenty years were gone since he 
had trodden that path, it was graven in his heart, so great was the sorrow of each step at 
the parting from Morwen. 

Thus at last he came back to the land of his childhood. It was bleak and bare; and the 
people there were few and churlish, and they spoke the harsh tongue of the Easterlings, 
and the old tongue was become the language of serfs, or of foes. Therefore Turin walked 
warily, hooded and silent, and he came at last to the house that he sought. It stood empty 
and dark, and no living thing dwelt near it; for Morwen was gone, and Brodda the 
Incomer (he that took by force Aerin, Hurin's kinswoman, to wife) had plundered her 
house, and taken all that was left to her of goods or of servants. Brodda’s house stood 
nearest to the old house of Hurin, and thither Turin came, spent with wandering and grief, 
begging for shelter; and it was granted to him, for some of the kindlier manners of old 
were still kept there by Aerin. He was given a seat by the fire by the servants, and a few 
vagabonds as grim and wayworn as he; and he asked news of the land. 

At that the company fell silent, and some drew away, looking askance at the stranger. But 
one old vagabond man, with a crutch, said: ’If you must speak the old tongue, master, 
speak it softer, and ask for no tidings. Would you be beaten for a rogue, or hung for a 
spy? For both you may well be by the looks of you. Which is but to say,’ he said, coming 
near and speaking low in Turin's ear, 'one of the kindly folk of old that came with Hador 
in the days of gold, before heads wore wolf-hair. Some here are of like sort, though now 
made beggars and slaves, and but for the Lady Aerin would get neither this fire nor this 
broth. Whence are you, and what news would you have?' 

'There was a lady called Morwen,' answered Turin, 'and long ago I lived in her house. 
Thither after far wandering I came to seek welcome, but neither fire nor folk are there 
now.' 

'Nor have been this long year and more,' answered the old man. 'But scant were both fire 
and folk in that house since the deadly war; for she was of the old people - as doubtless 



you know, the widow of our lord, Hurin Galdor's son. They dared not touch her, though, 
for they feared her; proud and fair as a queen, before sorrow marred her. 

Witchwife they called her, and shunned her. Witchwife: it is but "elf-friend" in the new 
language. Yet they robbed her. Often would she and her daughter have gone hungry, but 
for the Lady Aerin. She aided them in secret, it is said, and was often beaten for it by the 
churl Brodda, her husband by need.’ 

’And this long year and more?' said Turin. ’Are they dead, or made thralls? Or have the 
Ores assailed her?' 

'It is not known for sure,' said the old man. 'But she is gone with her daughter; and this 
Brodda has plundered her and stripped what remained. 

Not a dog is left, and her few folk made his slaves; save some that have gone begging, as 
have 1. 1 served her many a year, and the great master before, Sador Onefoot: a cursed 
axe in the woods long ago, or I would be lying in the Great Mound now. Well I 
remember the day when Hurin's boy was sent away, and how he wept; and she, when he 
was gone. To the Hidden Kingdom he went, it was said.’ 

With that the old man stayed his tongue, and eyed Turin doubtfully. 'I am old and I 
babble, master,' he said. 'Mind me not! But though it be pleasant to speak the old tongue 
with one that speaks it fair as in time past, the days are ill, and one must be wary. Not all 
that speak the fair tongue are fair at heart.' 

'Truly,' said Turin. 'My heart is grim. But if you fear that I am a spy of the North or the 
East, then you have learned little more wisdom than you had long ago, Sador Labadal.’ 

The old man eyed him agape; then trembling he spoke. 'Come outside! It is colder, but 
safer. You speak too loud, and I too much, for an Easterling's hall.' 

When they were come into the court he clutched at Turin's cloak. 'Long ago you dwelt in 
that house, you say. Lord Turin, why have you come back? My eyes are opened, and my 
ears at last: you have the voice of your father. But young Turin alone ever gave me that 
name, Labadal. He meant no ill: we were merry friends in those days. What does he seek 
here now? Few are we left; and we are old and weaponless. Happier are those in the 
Great Mound.’ 

'I did not come with thought of battle,' said Turin, 'though your words have waked the 
thought in me now, Labadal. But it must wait. I came seeking the Lady Morwen and 
Nienor. What can you tell me, and swiftly?' 

'Little, lord,’ said Sador. 'They went away secretly. It was whispered among us that they 
were summoned by the Lord Turin; for we did not doubt that he had grown great in the 
years, a king or a lord in some south country. But it seems this is not so.’ 



’It is not,' answered Turin. 'A lord I was in a south country, though now I am a vagabond. 
But I did not summon them.' 


'Then I know not what to tell you,' said Sador. 'But the Lady Aerin will know, I doubt 
not. She knew all the counsel of your mother.’ 

'How can I come to her?' 

'That I know not. It would cost her much pain were she caught whispering at a door with 
a wandering wretch of the downtrod people, even could any message call her forth. And 
such a beggannan as you are will not walk far up the hall towards the high board before 
the Easterlings seize him and beat him, or worse.’ 

Then in anger Turin cried: 'May I not walk up Brodda’s hall, and will they beat me? 

Come, and see!' 

Thereupon he went into the hall, and cast back his hood, and thrusting aside all in his 
path he strode towards the board where sat the master of the house and his wife, and other 
Easterling lords. Then some rose to seize him, but he flung them to the ground, and cried: 
'Does no one rule this house, or is it an Ore-hold rather? Where is the master?' 

Then Brodda rose in wrath. 'I rule this house,' said he. But before he could say more, 

Turin said: 'Then you have not yet learned the courtesy that was in this land before you. 

Is it now the manner of men to let lackeys mishandle the kinsmen of their wives? Such 
am I, and I have an errand to the Lady Aerin. Shall I come freely, or shall I come as I 
will?’ 

'Come,' said Brodda, scowling; but Aerin turned pale. 

Then Turin strode to the high board and stood before it, and bowed. 

'Your pardon, Lady Aerin,’ he said, 'that I break in upon you thus; but my errand is urgent 
and has brought me far. 

I seek Morwen, Lady of Dor-lomin, and Nienor her daughter. But her house is empty and 
plundered. What can you tell me?' 

'Nothing,' said Aerin in great fear, for Brodda watched her narrowly. 

'That I do not believe,' said Turin. 

Then Brodda sprang forth, and he was red with drunken rage. 'No more!’ he cried. 'Shall 
my wife be gainsaid before me, by a beggar that speaks the serf-tongue? There is no Lady 
of Dor-lomin. But as for Morwen, she was of the thrall-folk, and has fled as thralls will. 
Do you likewise, and swiftly, or I will have you hung on a tree!' 



Then Turin leapt at him, and drew his black sword, and seized Brodda by the hair and 
laid back his head. 'Let no one stir,' said he, 'or this head will leave its shoulders! Lady 
Aerin, I would beg your pardon once more, if I thought that this churl had ever done you 
anything but wrong. 

But speak now, and do not deny me! Am I not Turin, Lord of Dor-lomin? 

Shall I command you?' 

'Command me,' she said. 

'Who plundered the house of Morwen?' 

'Brodda,' she answered. 

'When did she flee, and whither?' 

'A year and three months gone,' said Aerin. 'Master Brodda and others of the Incomers of 
the East hereabout oppressed her sorely. Long ago she was bidden to the Hidden 
Kingdom; and she went forth at last. For the lands between were then free of evil for a 
while, because of the prowess of the Blacksword of the south country, it is said; but that 
is now ended. She looked to find her son there awaiting her. But if you are he, then I fear 
that all has gone awry.’ 

Then Turin laughed bitterly. 'Awry, awry?' he cried. 'Yes, ever awry: as crooked as 
Morgoth!’ And suddenly a black wrath shook him; for his eyes were opened, and the spell 
of Glaurung loosed its last threads, and he knew the lies with which he had been cheated. 
'Have I been cozened, that I might come and die here dishonoured, who might at least 
have ended valiantly before the Doors of Nargothrond?’ And out of the night about the 
hall it seemed to him that he heard the cries of Finduilas. 

'Not first will I die here!’ he cried. And he seized Brodda, and with the strength of his 
great anguish and wrath he lifted him on high and shook him, as if he were a dog. 
'Morwen of the thrall-folk, did you say? 

You son of dastards, thief, slave of slaves!' Thereupon he flung Brodda head foremost 
across his own table, full in the face of an Easterling that rose to assail Turin. In that fall 
Brodda’s neck was broken; and Turin leapt after his cast and slew three more that 
cowered there, for they were caught weaponless. There was tumult in the hall. The 
Easterlings that sat there would have come against Turin, but many others were gathered 
there who were of the elder people of Dor-lomin: long had they been tame servants, but 
now they rose with shouts of rebellion. Soon there was great fighting in the hall, and 
though the thralls had but meat-knives and such things as they could snatch up against 
daggers and swords, many were quickly slain on either hand, before Turin leapt down 
among them and slew the last of the Easterlings that remained in the hall. 



Then he rested, leaning against a pillar, and the fire of his rage was as ashes. But old 
Sador crept up to him and clutched him about the knees, for he was wounded to the 
death. ’Thrice seven years and more, it was long to wait for this hour,’ he said. ’But now 
go, go, lord! Go, and do not come back, unless with greater strength. They will raise the 
land against you. Many have run from the hall. Go, or you will end here. 

Farewell!’ Then he slipped down and died. 

'He speaks with the truth of death,' said Aerin. 'You have learned what you would. Now 
go swiftly! But go first to Morwen and comfort her, or I will hold all the wrack you have 
wrought here hard to forgive. For ill though my life was, you have brought death to me 
with your violence. The Incomers will avenge this night on all that were here. Rash are 
your deeds, son of Hurin, as if you were still but the child that I knew.' 

'And faint heart is yours, Aerin Indor's daughter, as it was when I called you aunt, and a 
rough dog frightened you,' said Turin. 'You were made for a kinder world. But come 
away! I will bring you to Morwen.’ 

'The snow lies on the land, but deeper upon my head,' she answered. 'I should die as soon 
in the wild with you, as with the brute Easterlings. 

You cannot mend what you have done. Go! To stay will make all the worse, and rob 
Morwen to no purpose. Go, I beg you!' 

Then Turin bowed low to her, and turned, and left the hall of Brodda; but all the rebels 
that had the strength followed him. They fled towards the mountains, for some among 
them knew well the ways of the wild, and they blessed the snow that fell behind them and 
covered their trail. 

Thus though soon the hunt was up, with many men and dogs and braying of horses, they 
escaped south into the hills. Then looking back they saw a red light far off in the land 
they had left. 

'They have fired the hall,' said Turin. 'To what purpose is that?' 

'They? No, lord: she, I guess,' said one, Asgon by name. 'Many a man of arms misreads 
patience and quiet. She did much good among us at much cost. Her heart was not faint, 
and patience will break at the last.' 

Now some of the hardiest that could endure the winter stayed with Turin and led him by 
strange paths to a refuge in the mountains, a cave known to outlaws and runagates; and 
some store of food was hidden there. There they waited until the snow ceased, and they 
gave him food and took him to a pass little used that led south to Sirion’s Vale, where the 
snow had not come. On the downward path they parted. 



'Farewell now, Lord of Dor-lomin,’ said Asgon. 'But do not forget us. We shall be hunted 
men now; and the Wolf-folk will be crueller because of your coming. Therefore go, and 
do not return, unless you come with strength to deliver us. Farewell!’ 



CHAPTER XIII 


THE COMING OF TURIN INTO BRETHIL 


Now Turin went down towards Sirion, and he was tom in mind. For it seemed to him that 
whereas before he had two bitter choices, now there were three, and his oppressed people 
called him, upon whom he had brought only increase of woe. This comfort only he had: 
that beyond doubt Morwen and Nienor had come long since to Doriath, and only by the 
prowess of the Blacksword of Nargothrond had their road been made safe. 

And he said in his thought: ’Where else better might I have bestowed them, had I come 
indeed sooner? If the Girdle of Melian be broken, then all is ended. Nay, it is better as 
things be; for by my wrath and rash deeds I cast a shadow wherever I dwell. Let Melian 
keep them! And I will leave them in peace unshadowed for a while.' 

But too late now Turin sought for Finduilas, roaming the woods under the eaves of Ered 
Wethrin, wild and wary as a beast; and he waylaid all the roads that went north to the 
Pass of Sirion. Too late. 

For all trails had been washed away by the rains and the snows. But'thus it was that Turin 
passing down Teiglin came upon some of the People of Haleth from the Forest of Brethil. 
They were dwindled now by war to a small people, and dwelt for the most part secretly 
within a stockade upon Amon Obel deep in the forest. Ephel Brandir that place was 
named; for Brandir son of Handir was now their lord, since his father was slain. And 
Brandir was no man of war, being lamed by a leg broken in a misadventure in childhood; 
and he was moreover gentle in mood, loving wood rather than metal, and the knowledge 
of things that grow in the earth rather than other lore. 

But some of the woodmen still hunted the Ores on their borders; and thus it was that as 
Turin came thither he heard the sound of an affray. He hastened towards it, and coming 
warily through the trees he saw a small band of men surrounded by Ores. They defended 
themselves desperately, with their backs to a knot of trees that grew apart in a glade; but 
the Ores were in great number, and they had little hope of escape, unless help came. 
Therefore, out of sight in the underwood, Turin made a great noise of stamping and 
crashing, and then he cried in a loud voice, as if leading many men: 'Ha! Here we find 
them! Follow me all! Out now, and slay!' 

At that many of the Ores looked back in dismay, and then out came Turin leaping, 
waving as if to men behind, and the edges of Gurthang flickered like flame in his hand. 
Too well was that blade known to the Ores, and even before he sprang among them many 
scattered and fled. Then the woodmen ran to join him, and together they hunted their foes 



into the river: few came across. At last they halted on the bank, and Dorlas, leader of the 
woodmen, said: 'You are swift in the hunt, lord; but your men are slow to follow.' 

'Nay,' said Turin, 'we all run together as one man, and will not be parted.’ 

Then the Men of Brethil laughed, and said: 'Well, one such is worth many. And we owe 
you great thanks. But who are you, and what do you here?' 

'I do but follow my trade, which is Ore-slaying,’ said Turin. 'And I dwell where my trade 
is. I am Wildman of the Woods.’ 

'Then come and dwell with us,' said they. 'For we dwell in the woods, and we have need 
of such craftsmen. You would be welcome!' 

Then Turin looked at them strangely, and said: 'Are there then any left who will suffer me 
to darken their doors? But, friends, I have still a grievous errand: to find Finduilas, 
daughter of Orodreth of Nargothrond, or at least to learn news of her. Alas! Many weeks 
is it since she was taken from Nargothrond, but still I must go seeking.’ 

Then they looked on him with pity, and Dorlas said: 'Seek no more. For an Ore-host 
came up from Nargothrond towards the Crossings of Teiglin, and we had long warning of 
it: it marched very slow, because of the number of captives that were led. Then we 
thought to deal our small stroke in the war, and we ambushed the Ores with all the 
bowmen we could muster, and hoped to save some of the prisoners. But alas! as soon as 
they were assailed the foul Ores slew first the women among their captives; and the 
daughter of Orodreth they fastened to a tree with a spear.' 

Turin stood as one mortally stricken. 'How do you know this?' he said. 

'Because she spoke to me, before she died,’ said Dorlas. 'She looked upon us as though 
seeking one whom she had expected, and she said: 

"Mormegil. Tell the Mormegil that Finduilas is here." She said no more. 

But because of her latest words we laid her where she died. She lies in a mound beside 
Teiglin. Yes, it is a month now ago.' 

'Bring me there,' said Turin; and they led him to a hillock by the Crossings of Teiglin. 
There he laid himself down, and a darkness fell on him, so that they thought he was dead. 
But Dorlas looked down at him as he lay, and then he turned to his men and said: 'Too 
late! This is a piteous chance. But see: here lies the Mormegil himself, the great captain 
of Nargothrond. By his sword we should have known him, as did the Ores.' For the fame 
of the Black Sword of the South had gone far and wide, even into the deeps of the wood. 

Now therefore they lifted him with reverence and bore him to Ephel Brandir; and Brandir 
coming to meet them wondered at the bier that they bore. Then drawing back the coverlet 



he looked on the face of Turin son of Hurin; and a dark shadow fell on his heart. 'O cruel 
Men of Haleth!’ he cried. ’Why did you hold back death from this man? With great labour 
you have brought hither the last bane of our people.' 

But the woodmen said: 'Nay, it is the Mormegil of Nargothrond, a mighty Ore-slayer, and 
he shall be a great help to us, if he lives. And were it not so, should we leave a man woe- 
stricken to lie as carrion by the way?’ 

'You should not indeed,' said Brandir. 'Doom willed it not so.’ And he took Turin into his 
house and tended him with care. 

But when at last Turin shook off the darkness, spring was returning; and he awoke and 
saw sun on the green buds. Then the courage of the House of Hador awoke in him also, 
and he arose and said in his heart: 'All my deeds and past days were dark and full of evil. 
But a new day is come. 

Here I will stay at peace, and renounce name and kin; and so I will put my shadow 
behind me, or at the least not lay it upon those that I love.’ 

Therefore he took a new name, calling himself Turambar, which in the High-elven 
speech signified Master of Doom; and he dwelt among the woodmen, and was loved by 
them, and he charged them to forget his name of old, and to count him as one born in 
Brethil. Y et with the change of a name he could not change wholly his temper, nor forget 
his old griefs against the servants of Morgoth; and he would go hunting the Ores with a 
few of the same mind, though this was displeasing to Brandir. For he hoped rather to 
preserve his people by silence and secrecy. 

'The Mormegil is no more,' said he, 'yet have a care lest the valour of Turambar bring a 
like vengeance on Brethil!’ 

Therefore Turambar laid his black sword by, and took it no more to battle, and wielded 
rather the bow and the spear. But he would not suffer the Ores to use the Crossings of 
Teiglin or draw near the mound where Finduilas was laid. Haudh-en-Elleth it was named, 
the Mound of the Elf-maid, and soon the Ores learned to dread that place, and shunned it. 

And Dorlas said to Turambar: 'You have renounced the name, but the Blacksword you 
are still; and does not rumour say truly that he was the son of Hurin of Dor-lomin, lord of 
the House of Hador?' 


And Turambar answered: 'So I have heard. But publish it not, I beg you, as you are my 
friend.' 



CHAPTER XIV 


THE JOURNEY OF MORWEN AND NIENOR TO 
NARGOTHROND 


When the Fell Winter withdrew new tidings of Nargothrond came to Doriath. For some 
that escaped from the sack, and had survived the winter in the wild, came at last seeking 
refuge with Thingol, and the march-wards brought them to the King. And some said that 
all the enemy had withdrawn northwards, and others that Glaurung abode still in the halls 
of Felagund; and some said that the Monnegil was slain, and others that he was cast 
under a spell by the Dragon and dwelt there yet, as one changed to stone. But all declared 
that it was known in Nargothrond ere the end that the Blacksword was none other than 
Turin son of Hurin of Dor-lomin. 

Then great was the fear and sorrow of Morwen and of Nienor; and Morwen said: ’Such 
doubt is the very work of Morgoth! May we not learn the truth, and know surely the 
worst that we must endure?' 

Now Thingol himself desired greatly to know more of the fate of Nargothrond, and had in 
mind already the sending out of some that might go warily thither, but he believed that 
Turin was indeed slain or beyond rescue, and he was loath to see the hour when Morwen 
should know this clearly. Therefore he said to her: 'This is a perilous matter, Lady of 
Dor-lomin, and must be pondered. Such doubt may in truth be the work of Morgoth, to 
draw us on to some rashness.’ 

But Morwen being distraught cried: 'Rashness, lord! If my son lurks in the woods hungry, 
if he lingers in bonds, if his body lies unburied, then I would be rash. I would lose no 
hour to go to seek him.’ 

'Lady of Dor-lomin,’ said Thingol, 'that surely the son of Hurin would not desire. Here 
would he think you better bestowed than in any other land that remains: in the keeping of 
Melian. For Hurin's sake and Turin's I would not have you wander abroad in the black 
peril of these days.’ 

'You did not hold Turin from peril, but me you will hold from him,’ cried Morwen. 'In the 
keeping of Melian! Yes, a prisoner of the Girdle! 

Long did I hold back before I entered it, and now I rue it.' 

'Nay, if you speak so, Lady of Dor-lomin,' said Thingol, 'know this: the Girdle is open. 
Free you came hither: free you shall stay - or go.’ 



Then Melian, who had remained silent, spoke: ’Go not hence, Morwen. A true word you 
said: this doubt is of Morgoth. If you go, you go at his will.' 


Tear of Morgoth will not withhold me from the call of my kin,’ Morwen answered. ’But if 
you fear for me, lord, then lend me some of your people.’ 

’I command you not,’ said Thingol. ’But my people are my own to command. 

I will send them at my own advice.’ 

Then Morwen said no more, but wept; and she left the presence of the King. Thingol was 
heavy-hearted, for it seemed to him that the mood of Morwen was fey; and he asked 
Melian whether she would not restrain her by her power. ’Against the coming in of evil I 
may do much,’ she answered. ’But against the going out of those who will go, nothing. 
That is your part. If she is to be held here, you must hold her with strength. Y et maybe 
thus you will overthrow her mind.’ 

Now Morwen went to Nienor, and said: ’Farewell, daughter of Hurin. I go to seek my 
son, or true tidings of him, since none here will do aught, but tarry till too late. Await me 
here until haply I return.’ Then Nienor in dread and distress would restrain her, but 
Morwen answered nothing, and went to her chamber; and when morning came she had 
taken horse and gone. 

Now Thingol had commanded that none should stay her, or seem to waylay her. But as 
soon as she went forth, he gathered a company of the hardiest and most skilled of his 
march-wards, and he set Mablung in charge. 

’Follow now speedily,’ he said, ’yet let her not be aware of you. But when she is come 
into the wild, if danger threatens, then show yourselves; and if she will not return, then 
guard her as you may. But some of you I would have go forward as far as you can, and 
leam all that you may.’ 

Thus it was that Thingol sent out a larger company than he had at first intended, and there 
were ten riders among them with spare horses. They followed after Morwen; and she 
went south through Region, and so came to the shores of Sirion above the Twilit Meres; 
and there she halted, for Sirion was wide and swift, and she did not know the way. 
Therefore now the guards must needs reveal themselves; and Morwen said: ’Will Thingol 
stay me? Or late does he send me the help he denied?’ 

’Both,’ answered Mablung. ’Will you not return?’ 

’No,’ she said. 

’Then I must help you,’ said Mablung, ’though it is against my own will. 

Wide and deep here is Sirion, and perilous to swim for beast or man.’ 



'Then bring me over by whatever way the Elven-folk are used to cross,' said Morwen; 'or 
else I will try the swimming.' 


Therefore Mablung led her to the Twilit Meres. There amid creeks and reeds ferries were 
kept hidden and guarded on the east shore; for by that way messengers would pass to and 
fro between Thingol and his kin in Nargothrond. Now they waited until the starlit night 
was late, and they passed over in the white mists before the dawn. And even as the sun 
rose red beyond the Blue Mountains, and a strong morning-wind blew and scattered the 
mists, the guards went up onto the west shore, and left the Girdle of Melian. 

Tall Elves of Doriath they were, grey-clad, and cloaked over their mail. 

Morwen from the ferry watched them as they passed silently, and then suddenly she gave 
a cry, and pointed to the last of the company that went by. 

'Whence came he?' she said. 'Thrice ten you came to me. Thrice ten and one you go 
ashore!' 

Then the others turned, and saw that the sun shone upon a head of gold: for it was Nienor, 
and her hood was blown back by the wind. Thus it was revealed that she had followed the 
company, and joined them in the dark before they crossed the river. They were dismayed, 
and none more than Morwen. 'Go back! Go back! I command you!' she cried. 

'If the wife of Hurin can go forth against all counsel at the call of kindred,' said Nienor, 
'then so also can Hurin's daughter. Mourning you named me, but I will not mourn alone, 
for father, brother, and mother. 

But of these you only have I known, and above all do I love. And nothing that you fear 
not do I fear.’ 

In truth little fear was seen in her face or her bearing. Tall and strong she seemed; for of 
great stature were those of Hador's house, and thus clad in Elvish raiment she matched 
well with the guards, being smaller only than the greatest among them. 

'What would you do?' said Morwen. 

'Go where you go,' said Nienor. 'This choice indeed I bring. To lead me back and bestow 
me safely in the keeping of Melian; for it is not wise to refuse her counsel. 

Or to know that I shall go into peril, if you go.' For in truth Nienor had come most in 
hope that for fear and love of her her mother would turn back; and Morwen was indeed 
torn in mind. 

'It is one thing to refuse counsel,' said she. 'It is another to refuse the command of your 
mother. Go now back!' 



'No,' said Nienor. 'It is long since I was a child. I have a will and wisdom of my own, 
though until now it has not crossed yours. I go with you. Rather to Doriath, for reverence 
of those that rule it; but if not, then westward. Indeed, if either of us should go on, it is I 
rather, in the fullness of strength.’ 

Then Morwen saw in the grey eyes of Nienor the steadfastness of Hurin; and she 
wavered, but she could not overcome her pride, and would not (save the fair words) seem 
thus to be led back by her daughter, as one old and doting. 'I go on, as I have purposed,’ 
she said. 'Come you also, but against my will.’ 

'Let it be so,' said Nienor. 

Then Mablung said to his company: 'Truly, it is by lack of counsel not of courage that 
Hurin's kin bring woe to others! Even so with Turin; yet not so with his fathers. But now 
they are all fey, and I like it not. 

More do I dread this errand of the King than the hunting of the Wolf. 

What is to be done?' 

But Morwen, who had come ashore and now drew near, heard the last of his words. 'Do 
as you are bidden by the King,' said she. 'Seek for tidings of Nargothrond, and of Turin. 
For this end are we all come together.’ 

'It is yet a long way and dangerous,' said Mablung. 'If you go further, you shall both be 
horsed and go among the riders, and stray no foot from them.' 

Thus it was that with the full day they set forth, and passed slowly and warily out of the 
country of reeds and low willows, and came to the grey woods that covered much of the 
southern plain before Nargothrond. All day they went due west, and saw nothing but 
desolation, and heard nothing; for the lands were silent, and it seemed to Mablung that a 
present fear lay upon them. That same way had Beren trodden years before, and then the 
woods were fdled with the hidden eyes of the hunters; but now all the people of Narog 
were gone, and the Ores, it seemed, were not yet roaming so far southward. That night 
they encamped in the grey wood without fire or light. 

The next two days they went on, and by evening of the third day from Sirion they were 
come across the plain and were drawing near to the east shores of Narog. Then so great 
an unease came upon Mablung that he begged Morwen to go no further. But she laughed, 
and said: 'You will be glad soon to be rid of us, as is likely enough. But you must endure 
us a little longer. We are come too near now to turn back in fear.’ 

Then Mablung cried: 'Fey are you both, and foolhardy. You help not but hinder any 
gathering of news. Now hear me! I was bidden not to stay you with strength; but I was 
bidden also to guard you, as I might. In this pass, one only can I do. And I will guard you. 



Tomorrow I will lead you to Amon Ethir, the Spyhill, which is near; and there you shall 
sit under guard, and go no further while I command here.’ Now Amon Ethir was a mound 
as great as a hill that long ago Felagund had caused to be raised with great labour in the 
plain before his Doors, a league east of Narog. It was tree-grown, save on the summit, 
whence a wide view might be had all ways of the roads that led to the great bridge of 
Nargothrond and of the lands round about. To this hill they came late in the morning and 
climbed up from the east. Then looking out towards the High Faroth, brown and bare 
beyond the river, Mablung saw with elven-sight the terraces of Nargothrond on the steep 
west bank, and as a small black hole in the hill-wall the gaping Doors of Felagund. But 
he could hear no sound, and he could see no sign of any foe, nor any token of the Dragon, 
save the burning about the Doors that he had wrought in the day of the sack. All lay quiet 
under a pale sun. 

Now therefore Mablung, as he had said, commanded his ten riders to keep Morwen and 
Nienor on the hill-top, and not to stir thence until he returned, unless some great peril 
arose: and if that befell, the riders should set Morwen and Nienor in their midst and flee 
as swiftly as they might, east-away towards Doriath, sending one ahead to bring news and 
seek aid. 

Then Mablung took the other score of his company, and they crept down from the hill; 
and then passing into the fields westward, where trees were few, they scattered and made 
each his way, daring but stealthy, to the ha nk s of Narog. 

Mablung himself took the middle way, going towards the bridge, and so came to its 
hither end and found it all broken down; and the deep-cloven river, running wild after 
rains far away northward, was foaming and roaring among the fallen stones. 

But Glaurung lay there, just within the shadow of the great passage that led inward from 
the ruined Doors, and he had long been aware of the spies, though few other eyes in 
Middle-earth would have discerned them. 

But the glance of his fell eyes was keener than that of the eagles, and outreached the far 
sight of the Elves; and indeed he knew also that some remained behind and sat upon the 
bare top of Amon Ethir. 

Thus, even as Mablung crept among the rocks, seeking whether he could ford the wild 
river upon the fallen stones of the bridge, suddenly Glaurung came forth with a great 
blast of fire, and crawled down into the stream. Then straightway there was a vast hissing 
and huge vapours arose, and Mablung and his followers that lurked near were engulfed in 
a blinding steam and foul stench; and the most fled as best they could guess towards the 
Spyhill. But as Glaurung was passing over Narog, Mablung drew aside and lay under a 
rock, and remained; for it seemed to him that he had an errand yet to do. He knew now 
indeed that Glaurung abode in Nargothrond, but he was bidden also to learn the truth 
concerning Hurin's son, if he might; and in the stoutness of his heart, therefore, he 
purposed to cross the river, as soon as Glaurung was gone, and search the halls of 
Felagund. For he thought that all had been done that could be for the keeping of Morwen 



and Nienor: the coming of Glaurung would be marked, and even now the riders should be 
speeding towards Doriath. 


Glaurung therefore passed Mablung by, a vast shape in the mist; and he went swiftly, for 
he was a mighty Worm, and yet lithe. Then Mablung behind him forded Narog in great 
peril; but the watchers upon Arnon Ethir beheld the issuing of the Dragon, and were 
dismayed. At once they bade Morwen and Nienor mount, without debate, and prepared to 
flee eastward as they were bidden. But even as they came down from the hill into the 
plain, an ill wind blew the great vapours upon them, bringing a stench that no horses 
would endure. Then, blinded by the fog and in mad terror of the dragon-reek, the horses 
soon became ungovernable, and went wildly this way and that; and the guards were 
dispersed, and were dashed against trees to great hurt, or sought vainly one for another. 
The neighing of the horses and the cries of the riders came to the ears of Glaurung; and 
he was well pleased. 

One of the Elf-riders, striving with his horse in the fog, saw suddenly the Lady Morwen 
passing near, a grey wraith upon a mad steed, but she vanished in the mist, crying Nienor, 
and they saw her no more. 

But when the blind terror came upon the riders, Nienor's horse, running wild, stumbled, 
and she was thrown. Falling softly into grass she was unhurt; but when she got to her feet 
she was alone: lost in the mist without horse or companion. 

Her heart did not fail her, and she took thought; and it seemed to her vain to go towards 
this cry or that, for cries were all about her, but growing ever fainter. Better it seemed to 
her in such case to seek again for the hill: thither doubtless Mablung would come before 
he went away, if only to be sure that none of his company had remained there. 

Therefore walking at guess she found the hill, which was indeed close at hand, by the 
rising of the ground before her feet; and slowly she climbed the path that led up from the 
east. And as she climbed so the fog grew thinner, until she came at last out into the 
sunlight on the bare summit. Then she stepped forward and looked westward. And there 
right before her was the great head of Glaurung, who had even then crept up from the 
other side; and before she was aware her eyes had looked in the fell spirit of his eyes, and 
they were terrible, being filled with the fell spirit of Morgoth, his master. 

Strong was the will and heart of Nienor, and she strove against Glaurung; but he put forth 
his power against her. ’What seek you here?' he said. 

And constrained to answer she said: 'I do but seek one Turin that dwelt here a while. But 
he is dead, maybe.’ 

’I know not,' said Glaurung. 'He was left here to defend the women and weaklings; but 
when I came he deserted them and fled. A boaster but a craven, it seems. Why seek you 
such a one?’ 



'You lie,' said Nienor. 'The children of Hurin at least are not craven. 


We fear you not.' 

Then Glaurung laughed, for so was Hurin's daughter revealed to his malice. 'Then you are 
fools, both you and your brother,' said he. 'And your boast shall be made vain. For I am 
Glaurung!’ 

Then he drew her eyes into his, and her will swooned. And it seemed to her that the sun 
sickened and all became dim about her; and slowly a great darkness drew down on her 
and in that darkness there was emptiness; she knew nothing, and heard nothing, and 
remembered nothing. 

Long Mablung explored the halls of Nargothrond, as well he might for the darkness and 
the stench; but he found no living thing there: nothing stirred among the bones, and none 
answered his cries. At last, being oppressed by the horror of the place, and fearing the 
return of Glaurung, he came back to the Doors. The sun was sinking west, and the 
shadows of the Faroth behind lay dark on the terraces and the wild river below; but away 
beneath Arnon Ethir he descried, as it seemed, the evil shape of the Dragon. Harder and 
more perilous was the return over Narog in such haste and fear; and scarcely had he 
reached the east shore and crept aside under the bank when Glaurung drew nigh. But he 
was slow now and stealthy; for all the fires in him were burned low: great power had 
gone out of him, and he would rest and sleep in the dark. Thus he writhed through the 
water and slunk up to the Doors like a huge snake, ashen-grey, sliming the ground with 
his belly. 

But he turned before he went in and looked back eastward, and there came from him the 
laughter of Morgoth, dim but horrible, as an echo of malice out of the black depths far 
away. And this voice, cold and low, came after: 'There you lie like a vole under the bank, 
Mablung the mighty! 

Ill do you run the errands of Thingol. Haste you now to the hill and see what is become of 
your charge!’ 

Then Glaurung passed into his lair, and the sun went down and grey evening came chill 
over the land. But Mablung hastened back to Arnon Ethir, and as he climbed to the top 
the stars came out in the east. 

Against them he saw there standing, dark and still, a figure as it were an image of stone. 
Thus Nienor stood, and heard nothing that he said, and made him no answer. But when at 
last he took her hand, she stirred, and suffered him to lead her away; and while he held 
her she followed, but if he loosed her, she stood still. 

Then great was Mablung's grief and bewilderment; but no other choice had he but to lead 
Nienor so upon the long eastward way, without help or company. Thus they passed away, 



walking like dreamers, out into the night-shadowed plain. And when morning returned 
Nienor stumbled and fell, and lay still; and Mablung sat beside her in despair. 

’Not for nothing did I dread this errand,’ he said. 'For it will be my last, it seems. With this 
unlucky child of Men I shall perish in the wilderness, and my name shall be held in scorn 
in Doriath: if any tidings indeed are ever heard of our fate. All else doubtless are slain, 
and she alone spared, but not in mercy.' 

Thus they were found by three of the company that had fled from Narog at the coming of 
Glaurung, and after much wandering, when the mist had passed, went back to the hill; 
and finding it empty they had begun to seek their way home. Hope then returned to 
Mablung; and they went on now together steering northward and eastward, for there was 
no road back into Doriath in the south, and since the fall of Nargothrond the ferry- wards 
were forbidden to set any across save those that came from within. 

Slow was their journey, as for those that lead a weary child. But ever as they passed 
further from Nargothrond and drew nearer to Doriath, so little by little strength returned 
to Nienor, and she would walk hour by hour obediently, led by the hand. Yet her wide 
eyes saw nothing, and her ears heard no words, and her lips spoke no words. 

And now at length after many days they came nigh to the west border of Doriath, 
somewhat south of the Teiglin; for they intended to pass the fences of the little land of 
Thingol beyond Sirion and so come to the guarded bridge near the inflowing of 
Esgalduin. There a while they halted; and they laid Nienor on a couch of grass, and she 
closed her eyes, as she had not yet done, and it seemed that she slept. Then the Elves 
rested also, and for very weariness were unheedful. Thus they were assailed at unawares 
by a band of ore-hunters, such as now roamed much in that region, as nigh to the fences 
of Doriath as they dared to go. In the midst of the affray suddenly Nienor leapt up from 
her couch, as one waking out of sleep to an alarm by night, and with a cry she sped away 
into the forest. Then the Ores turned and gave chase, and the Elves after them. But a 
strange change had come upon Nienor and now she outran them all, flying like a deer 
among the trees with her hair streaming in the wind of her speed. The Ores indeed 
Mablung and his companions swiftly overtook, and they slew them one and all, and 
hastened on. But by then Nienor had passed away like a wraith; and neither sight nor slot 
of her could they find, though they hunted far northward and searched for many days. 

Then at last Mablung returned to Doriath bowed with grief and with shame. 'Choose you 
a new master of your hunters, lord,' he said to the King. 'For I am dishonoured.’ 

But Melian said: 'It is not so, Mablung. You did all that you could, and none other among 
the King's servants would have done so much. But by ill chance you were matched 
against a power too great for you, too great indeed for all that now dwell in Middle-earth.’ 

'I sent you to win tidings, and that you have done,' said Thingol. 'It is no fault of yours 
that those whom your tidings touch nearest are now beyond hearing. Grievous indeed is 
this end of all Hurin’s kin, but it lies not at your door.’ 



For not only was Nienor now run witless into the wild, but Morwen also was lost. Neither 
then nor after did any certain news of her fate come to Doriath or to Dor-lomin. 
Nonetheless Mablung would not rest, and with a small company he went into the wild 
and for three years wandered far, from Ered Wethrin even to the Mouths of Sirion, 
seeking for sign or tidings of the lost. 



CHAPTER XV 


NIENOR IN BRETHIL 


But as for Nienor, she ran on into the wood, hearing the shouts of pursuit come behind; 
and her clothing she tore off, casting away her garments one by one as she fled, until she 
went naked; and all that day still she ran, as a beast that is hunted to heart-bursting, and 
dare not stay or draw breath. But at evening suddenly her madness passed. She stood still 
a moment as in wonder, and then, in a swoon of utter weariness, she fell as one stricken 
down into a deep brake of fem. And there amid the old bracken and the swift fronds of 
spring she lay and slept, heedless of all. 

In the morning she woke, and rejoiced in the light as one first called to life; and all things 
that she saw seemed to her new and strange, and she had no names for them. For behind 
her lay only an empty darkness, through which came no memory of anything she had 
ever known, nor any echo of any word. A shadow of fear only she remembered, and so 
she was wary, and sought ever for hidings: she would climb into trees or slip into 
thickets, swift as a squirrel or fox, if any sound or shadow frightened her; and thence she 
would peer long through the leaves with shy eyes, before she went on again. 

Thus going forward in the way she first ran, she came to the river Teiglin, and stayed her 
thirst; but no food she found, nor knew how to seek it, and she was famished and cold. 
And since the trees across the water seemed closer and darker (as indeed they were, being 
the eaves of Brethil forest) she crossed over at last, and came to a green mound and there 
cast herself down: for she was spent, and it seemed to her that the darkness that lay 
behind her was overtaking her again, and the sun going dark. 

But indeed it was a black storm that came up out of the South, laden with lightning and 
great rain; and she lay there cowering in terror of the thunder, and the dark rain smote her 
nakedness, and she watched without words as a wild thing that is trapped. 

Now it chanced that some of the woodmen of Brethil came by in that hour from a foray 
against Ores, hastening over the Crossings of Teiglin to a shelter that was near; and there 
came a great flash of lightning, so that the Haudh-en-Elleth was lit as with a white flame. 
Then Turambar who led the men started back and covered his eyes, and trembled; for it 
seemed that he saw the wraith of a slain maiden that lay on the grave of Finduilas. 

But one of the men ran to the mound, and called to him: 'Hither, lord! 

Here is a young woman lying, and she lives!' and Turambar coming lifted her, and the 
water dripped from her drenched hair, but she closed her eyes and quivered and strove no 
more. Then marvelling that she lay thus naked Turambar cast his cloak about her and 



bore her away to the hunters’ lodge in the woods. There they lit a fire and wrapped 
coverlets about her, and she opened her eyes and looked upon them; and when her glance 
fell on Turambar a light came in her face and she put out a hand towards him, for it 
seemed to her that she had found at last something that she had sought in the darkness, 
and she was comforted. But Turambar took her hand, and smiled, and said: 'Now, lady, 
will you not tell us your name and your kin, and what evil has befallen you?' 

Then she shook her head, and said nothing, but began to weep; and they troubled her no 
more, until she had eaten hungrily of what food they could give her. And when she had 
eaten she sighed, and laid her hand again in Turambar's; and he said: 'With us you are 
safe. Here you may rest this night, and in the morning we will lead you to our homes up 
in the high forest. But we would know your name and your kin, so that we may find 
them, maybe, and bring them news of you. Will you not tell us?’ 

But again she made no answer, and wept. 

'Do not be troubled!’ said Turambar. 'Maybe the tale is too sad yet to tell. But I will give 
you a name, and call you Niniel, Maid of Tears.’ And at that name she looked up, and she 
shook her head, but said: 'Niniel.' And that was the first word that she spoke after her 
darkness, and it was her name among the woodmen ever after. 

In the morning they bore Niniel towards Ephel Brandir, and the road went steeply up 
until it came to a place where it must cross the tumbling stream of Celebros. There a 
bridge of wood had been built, and below it the stream went over a lip of worn stone, and 
fell down by many foaming steps into a rocky bowl far below; and all the air was filled 
with spray like rain. There was a wide green sward at the head of the falls, and birches 
grew about it, but over the bridge there was a wide view towards the ravines of Teiglin 
some two miles to the west. There the air was ever cool, and there wayfarers in summer 
would rest and drink of the cold water. Dimrost, the Rainy Stair, those falls were called, 
but after that day Nen Girith, the Shuddering Water; for Turambar and his men halted 
there, but as soon as Niniel came to that place she grew cold and shivered, and they could 
not warm her or comfort her. Therefore they hastened on their way; but before they came 
to Ephel Brandir Niniel was wandering in a fever. 

Long she lay in her sickness, and Brandir used all his skill in her healing, and the wives 
of the woodmen watched over her by night and by day. But only when Turambar stayed 
near her would she lie at peace, or sleep without moaning; and this thing all marked that 
watched her: throughout all her fever, though often she was much troubled, she 
murmured never a word in any tongue of Elves or of Men. And when health slowly 
returned to her, and she waked, and began to eat again, then as with a child the women of 
Brethil must teach her to speak, word by word. 

But in this learning she was quick and took great delight, as one that finds again 
treasures, great and small, that were mislaid; and when at length she had learned enough 
to speak with her friends she would say: 'What is the name of this thing? For in my 
darkness I lost it.' And when she was able to go about again, she would seek the house of 



Brandir; for she was most eager to learn the names of all living things, and he knew much 
of such matters; and they would walk together in the gardens and the glades. 


Then Brandir grew to love her; and when she grew strong she would lend him her arm for 
his lameness, and she called him her brother. But to Turambar her heart was given, and 
only at his coming would she smile, and only when he spoke gaily would she laugh. 


One evening of the golden autumn they sat together, and the sun set the hillside and the 
houses of Ephel Brandir aglow, and there was a deep quiet. Then Niniel said to him: ’Of 
all things I have now asked the name, save you. What are you called?' 

'Turambar,' he answered. 

Then she paused as if listening for some echo; but she said: 'And what does that say, or is 
it just the name for you alone?' 

'It means,' said he, 'Master of the Dark Shadow. For I also, Niniel, had my darkness, in 
which dear things were lost; but now I have overcome it, I deem.’ 

'And did you also flee from it, running, until you came to these fair woods?' she said. 
'And when did you escape, Turambar?' 

'Yes,' he answered. 'I fled for many years. And I escaped when you did so. For it was 
dark when you came, Niniel, but ever since it has been light. And it seems to me that 
what I long sought in vain has come to me.’ And as he went back to his house in the 
twilight, he said to himself: 'Haudh-en-Elleth! From the green mound she came. Is that a 
sign, and how shall I read it?' 

Now that golden year waned and passed to a gentle winter, and there came another bright 
year. There was peace in Brethil, and the woodmen held themselves quiet and went not 
abroad, and they heard no tidings of the lands that lay about them. For the Ores that at 
that time came southward to the dark reign of Glaurung, or were sent to spy on the 
borders of Doriath, shunned the Crossings of Teiglin, and passed westward far beyond 
the river. 

And now Niniel was fully healed, and was grown fair and strong, and Turambar 
restrained himself no longer, but asked her in marriage. Then Niniel was glad; but when 
Brandir heard of it his heart was sick within him, and he said to her: 'Be not in haste! 
Think me not unkindly, if I counsel you to wait.’ 

'Nothing that you do is done unkindly,' she said. 'But why then do you give me such 
counsel, wise brother?' 

'Wise brother?’ he answered. 'Fame brother, rather, unloved and unlovely. And I scarce 
know why. Yet there lies a shadow on this man, and I am afraid.’ 



’There was a shadow,' said Niniel, 'for so he told me. But he has escaped from it, even as 
I. And is he not worthy of love? Though he now holds himself at peace, was he not once 
the greatest captain, from whom all our enemies would flee, if they saw him?' 


'Who told you this?' said Brandir. 

'It was Dorlas,' she said. 'Does he not speak truth?' 

'Truth indeed,' said Brandir, but he was ill pleased, for Dorlas was chief of that party that 
wished for war on the Ores. And yet he sought still for reasons to delay Niniel; and he 
said therefore: 'The truth, but not the whole truth; for he was the Captain of Nargothrond, 
and came before out of the North, and was (it is said) son of Hurin of Dor-lomin of the 
warlike House of Hador.’ And Brandir, seeing the shadow that passed over her face at 
that name, misread her, and said more: 'Indeed, Niniel, well may you think that such a 
one is likely ere long to go back to war, far from this land, maybe. And if so, how long 
will you endure it? Have a care, for I forebode that if Turambar goes again to battle, then 
not he but the Shadow shall have the mastery.' 

'Ill would I endure it,' she answered; 'but unwedded no better than wedded. And a wife, 
maybe, would better restrain him, and hold off the shadow.' Nonetheless she was troubled 
by the words of Brandir, and she bade Turambar wait yet a while. And he wondered and 
was downcast; but when he learned from Niniel that Brandir had counselled her to wait 
he was ill pleased. 

But when the next spring came he said to Niniel: 'Time passes. We have waited, and now 
I will wait no longer. Do as your heart bids you, Niniel most dear, but see: this is the 
choice before me. I will go back now to war in the wild; or I will wed you, and go never 
to war again - save only to defend you, if some evil assails our home.’ 

Then she was glad indeed, and she plighted her troth, and at the mid-summer they were 
wedded; and the woodmen made a great feast, and they gave them a fair house which 
they had built for them upon Arnon Obel. There they dwelt in happiness, but Brandir was 
troubled, and the shadow on his heart grew deeper. 



CHAPTER XVI 


THE COMING OF GLAURUNG 


Now the power and malice of Glaurung grew apace, and he waxed fat, and he gathered 
Ores to him, and ruled as a dragon-king, and all the realm of Nargothrond that had been 
was laid under him. And before this year ended, the third of Turambar's dwelling among 
the woodmen, he began to assail their land, which for a while had had peace; for indeed it 
was well known to Glaurung and to his Master that in Brethil there abode a remnant of 
free men, the last of the Three Houses to defy the power of the North. And this they 
would not brook; for it was the purpose of Morgoth to subdue all Beleriand and to search 
out its every corner, so that none in any hole or hiding might live that were not thrall to 
him. 

Thus, whether Glaurung guessed where Turin was hidden, or whether (as some hold) he 
had indeed for that time escaped from the eye of Evil that pursued him, is of little matter. 
For in the end the counsels of Brandir must prove vain, and at the last two choices only 
could there be for Turambar: to sit deedless until he was found, driven forth like a rat; or 
to go forth soon to battle, and be revealed. 

But when tidings of the coming of the Ores were first brought to Ephel Brandir, he did 
not go forth and yielded to the prayers of Niniel. For she said: ’Our homes are not yet 
assailed, as your word was. It is said that the Ores are not many. And Dorlas told me that 
before you came such affrays were not seldom, and the woodmen held them off 

But the woodmen were worsted, for these Ores were of a fell breed, fierce and cunning; 
and indeed they came with a purpose to invade the Forest of Brethil, not as before 
passing through its eaves on other errands, or hunting in small bands. Therefore Dorlas 
and his men were driven back with loss, and the Ores came over Teiglin and roamed far 
into the woods. And Dorlas came to Turambar and showed his wounds, and he said: ’See, 
lord, now is the time of our need come upon us, after a false peace, even as I foreboded. 
Did you not ask to be counted one of our people, and no stranger? Is this peril not yours 
also? For our homes will not remain hidden, if the Ores come further into our land.’ 

Therefore Turambar arose, and took up again his sword Gurthang, and he went to battle; 
and when the woodmen learned this they were greatly heartened, and they gathered to 
him, till he had a force of many hundreds. Then they hunted through the forest and slew 
all the Ores that crept there, and hung them on the trees near the Crossings of Teiglin. 
And when a new host came against them, they trapped it, and being surprised both by the 
numbers of the woodmen and by the terror of the Black Sword that had returned, the Ores 
were routed and slain in great number. Then the woodmen made great pyres and burned 
the bodies of the soldiers of Morgoth in heaps, and the smoke of their vengeance rose 



black into heaven, and the wind bore it away westward. But few living went back to 
Nargothrond with these tidings. 


Then Glaurung was wrathful indeed; but for a while he lay still and pondered what he had 
heard. Thus the winter passed in peace, and men said: ’Great is the Black Sword of 
Brethil, for all our enemies are overcome.’ And Niniel was comforted, and she rejoiced in 
the renown of Turambar; but he sat in thought, and he said in his heart: ’The die is cast. 
Now comes the test, in which my boast shall be made good, or fail utterly. I will flee no 
more. Turambar indeed I will be, and by my own will and prowess I will sunnount my 
doom - or fall. But falling or riding, Glaurung at least I will slay.' 

Nonetheless he was unquiet, and he sent out men of daring as scouts far afield. For 
indeed, though no word was said, he now ordered things as he would, as if he were lord 
of Brethil, and no man heeded Brandir. 

Spring came hopefully, and men sang at their work. But in that spring Niniel conceived, 
and she became pale and wan, and all her happiness was dimmed. And soon after there 
came strange tidings, from the men that had gone abroad beyond Teiglin, that there was a 
great burning far out in the woods of the plain towards Nargothrond, and men wondered 
what it might be. 

But before long there came more reports: that the fires drew ever northward, and that 
indeed Glaurung himself made them. For he had left Nargothrond, and was abroad again 
on some errand. Then the more foolish or more hopeful said: 'His army is destroyed, and 
now at last he sees wisdom, and is going back whence he came.’ And others said: 'Let us 
hope that he will pass us by.' But Turambar had no such hope, and knew that Glaurung 
was coming to seek him. Therefore though he masked his mind because of Niniel, he 
pondered ever by day and by night what counsel he should take; and spring turned 
towards summer. 

A day came when two men returned to Ephel Brandir in terror, for they had seen the 
Great Worm himself. 'In truth, lord,’ they said, 'he draws now near to Teiglin, and turns 
not aside. He lay in the midst of a great burning, and the trees smoked about him. The 
stench of him is scarce to be endured. And all the long leagues back to Nargothrond his 
foul swath lies, we deem, in a line that swerves not, but points straight to us. 

What is to be done?' 

'Little,' said Turambar, 'but to that little I have already given thought. The tidings you 
bring give me hope rather than dread; for if indeed he goes straight, as you say, and does 
not swerve, then I have some counsel for hardy hearts.’ The men wondered, for he said no 
more at that time; but they took heart from his steadfast bearing. 

Now the river Teiglin ran in this manner. It flowed down from Ered Wethrin swift as 
Narog, but at first between low shores, until after the Crossings, gathering power from 



other streams, it clove a way through the feet of the highlands upon which stood the 
Forest of Brethil. 

Thereafter it ran in deep ravines, whose great sides were like walls of rock, but pent at the 
bottom the waters flowed with great force and noise. And right in the path of Glaurung 
there lay now one of these gorges, by no means the deepest, but the narrowest, just north 
of the inflow of Celebros. Therefore Turambar sent out three hardy men to keep watch 
from the brink on the movements of the Dragon; but he himself would ride to the high 
fall of Nen Girith, where news could find him swiftly, and whence he himself could look 
far across the lands. 

But first he gathered the woodmen together in Ephel Brandir and spoke to them, saying: 
'Men of Brethil, a deadly peril has come upon us, which only great hardihood shall turn 
aside. But in this matter numbers will avail little; we must use cunning, and hope for 
good fortune. If we went up against the Dragon with all our strength, as against an anny 
of Ores, we should but offer ourselves all to death, and so leave our wives and kin 
defenceless. Therefore I say that you should stay here, and prepare for flight. For if 
Glaurung comes, then you must abandon this place, and scatter far and wide; and so may 
some escape and live. For certainly, if he can, he will destroy it, and all that he espies; but 
afterwards he will not abide here. In Nargothrond lies all his treasure, and there are the 
deep halls in which he can lie safe, and grow.' 

Then the men were dismayed, and were utterly downcast, for they trusted in Turambar, 
and had looked for more hopeful words. But he said: 'Nay, that is the worst. And it shall 
not come to pass, if my counsel and fortune are good. For I do not believe that this 
Dragon is unconquerable, though he grows greater in strength and malice with the years. 

I know somewhat of him. His power is rather in the evil spirit that dwells within him than 
in the might of his body, great though that be. For hear now this tale that I was told by 
some that fought in the year of the Nirnaeth, when I and most that hear me were children. 
In that field the Dwarves withstood him and Azaghal of Belegost pricked him so deep 
that he fled back to Angband. But here is a thorn sharper and longer than the knife of 
Azaghal.’ 

And Turambar swept Gurthang from its sheath and stabbed with it up above his head, and 
it seemed to those that looked on that a flame leapt from Turambar's hand many feet into 
the air. Then they gave a great cry: 'The Black Thorn of Brethil!' 

'The Black Thorn of Brethil,' said Turambar: 'well may he fear it. For know this: it is the 
doom of this Dragon (and all his brood, it is said) that how great so ever be his armour of 
hom, harder than iron, below he must go with the belly of a snake. Therefore, Men of 
Brethil, I go now to seek the belly of Glaurung, by what means I may. Who will come 
with me? I need but a few with strong arms and stronger hearts.’ 


Then Dorlas stood forth and said: 'I will go with you, lord: for I would ever go forward 
rather than wait for a foe.’ 



But no others were so swift to the call, for the dread of Glaurung lay on them, and the tale 
of the scouts that had seen him had gone about and grown in the telling. Then Dorlas 
cried out: 'Hearken, Men of Brethil, it is now well seen that for the evil of our times the 
counsels of Brandir were vain. There is no escape by hiding. Will none of you take the 
place of the son of Handir, that the house of Haleth be not put to shame?' Thus Brandir, 
who sat indeed in the high-seat of the lord of the assembly, but unheeded, was scorned, 
and he was bitter in his heart; for Turambar did not rebuke Dorlas. But one Hunthor, 
Brandir's kinsman, arose and said: 'You do evilly, Dorlas, to speak thus to the shame of 
your lord, whose limbs by ill hazard cannot do as his heart would. 

Beware lest the contrary be seen in you at some turn! And how can it be said that his 
counsels were vain, when they were never taken? You, his liege, have ever set them at 
naught. I say to you that Glaurung comes now to us, as to Nargothrond before, because 
our deeds have betrayed us, as he feared. But since this woe is now come, with your 
leave, son of Handir, I will go on behalf of Haleth' s house.’ 

Then Turambar said: 'Three is enough! You twain will I take. But, lord, I do not scorn 
you. See! We must go in great haste, and our task will need strong limbs. I deem that 
your place is with your people. For you are wise, and are a healer; and it may be that 
there will be great need of wisdom and healing ere long.’ But these words, though fair 
spoken, did but embitter Brandir the more, and he said to Hunthor: 'Go then, but not with 
my leave. For a shadow lies on this man, and it will lead you to evil.’ 

Now Turambar was in haste to go; but when he came to Niniel to bid her farewell, she 
clung to him, weeping grievously. 'Go not forth, Turambar, I beg!' she said. 'Challenge 
not the shadow that you have fled from! 

Nay, nay, flee still, and take me with you, far away!' 

'Niniel most dear,’ he answered, 'we cannot flee further, you and I. We are hemmed in 
this land. And even should I go, deserting the people that befriended us, I could but take 
you forth into the houseless wild, to your death and the death of our child. A hundred 
leagues lie between us and any land that is yet beyond the reach of the Shadow. But take 
heart, Niniel. For I say to you: neither you nor I shall be slain by this Dragon, nor by any 
foes of the North.' Then Niniel ceased to weep and fell silent, but her kiss was cold as 
they parted. 

Then Turambar with Dorlas and Hunthor went away hotfoot to Nen Girith, and when 
they came there the sun was westering and shadows were long; and the last two of the 
scouts were there awaiting them. 

'You come not too soon, lord,' said they. 'For the Dragon has come on, and already when 
we left he had reached the brink of the Teiglin, and glared across the water. He moves 
ever by night, and we may look then for some stroke before tomorrow's dawn.’ 



Turambar looked out over the falls of Celebros and saw the sun going down to its setting, 
and black spires of smoke rising by the borders of the river. ’There is no time to lose,’ he 
said; 'yet these tidings are good. For my fear was that he would seek about; and if he 
passed northward and came to the Crossings and so to the old road in the lowland, then 
hope would be dead. But now some fury of pride and malice drives him headlong.’ But 
even as he spoke, he wondered, and mused in his mind: ’Or can it be that one so evil and 
fell shuns the Crossings, even as the Ores? Haudh-en-Elleth! Does Finduilas lie still 
between me and my doom?' 

Then he turned to his companions and said: 'This task now lies before us. We must wait 
yet a little, for too soon in this case were as ill as too late. When dusk falls, we must creep 
down, with all stealth, to Teiglin. But beware! For the ears of Glaurung are as keen as his 
eyes, and they are deadly. If we reach the river unmarked, we must then climb down into 
the ravine, and cross the water, and so come in the path that he will take when he stirs.' 

'But how can he come forward so?' said Dorlas. 'Lithe he may be, but he is a great 
Dragon, and how shall he climb down the one cliff and up the other, when part must 
again be climbing before the hinder part is yet descended? And if he can so, what will it 
avail us to be in the wild water below?' 

'Maybe he can so,' answered Turambar, 'and indeed if he does, it will go ill with us. But it 
is my hope from what we leam of him, and from the place where he now lies, that his 
purpose is otherwise. He is come to the brink of Cabed-en-Aras, over which, as you tell, a 
deer once leaped from the huntsmen of Haleth. So great is he now that I think he will 
seek to cast himself across there. That is all our hope, and we may trust to it.' 

Dorlas' heart sank at these words; for he knew better than any all the land of Brethil, and 
Cabed-en-Aras was a grim place indeed. On the east side was a sheer cliff of some forty 
feet, bare but tree-grown at the crown; on the other side was a bank somewhat less sheer 
and less high, shrouded with hanging trees and bushes, but between them the water ran 
fiercely between rocks, and though a man bold and sure-footed might ford it by day, it 
was perilous to dare it at night. But this was the counsel of Turambar, and it was useless 
to gainsay him. 

They set out therefore at dusk, and they did not go straight towards the Dragon, but took 
first the path towards the Crossings; then, before they came so far, they turned southward 
by a narrow track and passed into the twilight of the woods above Teiglin. And as they 
drew near to Cabed-en-Aras, step by step, halting often to listen, the reek of burning 
came to them, and a stench that sickened them. But all was deadly still, and there was no 
stir of air. 

The first stars glimmered in the east before them, and faint spires of smoke rose straight 
and unwavering against the last light in the west. 


Now when Turambar was gone Niniel stood silent as a stone; but Brandir came to her and 
said: 'Niniel, fear not the worst until you must. But did I not counsel you to wait?' 



'You did so,' she answered. 'Yet how would that profit me now? For love may abide and 
suffer unwedded.’ 


'That I know,' said Brandir. 'Yet wedding is not for nothing.’ 

'No,' said Niniel. Tor now I am two months gone with his child. But it does not seem to 
me that my fear of loss is the more heavy to bear. I understand you not.' 

'Nor I myself,' said he. 'And yet I am afraid.’ 

'What a comforter you are!' she cried. 'But Brandir, friend: wedded or unwedded, mother 
or maid, my dread is beyond enduring. The Master of Doom is gone to challenge his 
doom far hence, and how shall I stay here and wait for the slow coming of tidings, good 
or ill? This night, it may be, he will meet with the Dragon, and how shall I stand or sit, or 
pass the dreadful hours?' 

'I know not,' said he, 'but somehow the hours must pass, for you and for the wives of 
those that went with him.' 

'Let them do as their hearts bid!' she cried. 'But for me, I shall go. 

The miles shall not lie between me and my lord's peril. I will go to meet the tidings!' 

Then Brandir's dread grew black at her words, and he cried: 'That you shall not do, if I 
may hinder it. For thus will you endanger all counsel. The miles that lie between may 
give time for escape, if ill befall.' 

'If ill befall, I shall not wish to escape,' she said. 'And now your wisdom is vain, and you 
shall not hinder me.’ And she stood forth before the people that were still gathered in the 
open place of the Ephel, and she cried: 'Men of Brethil! I will not wait here. If my lord 
fails, then all hope is false. Your land and woods shall be burned utterly, and all your 
houses laid in ashes, and none, none, shall escape. Therefore why tarry here? Now I go to 
meet the tidings and whatever doom may send. Let all those of like mind come with me!' 

Then many were willing to go with her: the wives of Dorlas and Hunthor because those 
whom they loved were gone with Turambar; others for pity of Niniel and desire to 
befriend her; and many more that were lured by the very rumour of the Dragon, in their 
hardihood or their folly (knowing little of evil) thinking to see strange and glorious deeds. 
For indeed so great in their minds had the Black Sword become that few could believe 
that even Glaurung would conquer him. Therefore they set forth soon in haste, a great 
company, towards a peril that they did not understand; and going with little rest they 
came wearily at last, just at nightfall, to Nen Girith but a little while after Turambar had 
departed. But night is a cold counsellor, and many were now amazed at their own 
rashness; and when they heard from the scouts that remained there how near Glaurung 
was come, and the desperate purpose of Turambar, their hearts were chilled, and they 



dared go no further. Some looked out towards Cabed-en-Aras with anxious eyes, but 
nothing could they see, and nothing hear save the cold voice of the falls. And Niniel sat 
apart, and a great shuddering seized her. 

When Niniel and her company had gone, Brandir said to those that remained: ’Behold 
how I am scorned, and all my counsel disdained! Choose you another to lead you: for 
here I renounce both lordship and people. 

Let Turambar be your lord in name, since already he has taken all my authority. Let none 
seek of me ever again either counsel or healing!' 

And he broke his staff. To himself he thought: 'Now nothing is left to me, save only my 
love of Niniel: therefore where she goes, in wisdom or folly, I must go. In this dark hour 
nothing can be foreseen; but it may well chance that even I could ward off some evil 
from her, if I were nigh.’ 

He girt himself therefore with a short sword, as seldom before, and took his crutch, and 
went with what speed he might out of the gate of the Ephel, limping after the others down 
the long path to the west march of Brethil. 



CHAPTER XVII 


THE DEATH OF GLAURUNG 


At last, even as full night closed over the land, Turambar and his companions came to 
Cabed-en-Aras, and they were glad of the great noise of the water; for though it promised 
peril below, it covered all other sounds. Then Dorlas led them a little aside, southwards, 
and they climbed down by a cleft to the cliff-foot; but there his heart quailed, for many 
rocks and great stones lay in the river, and the water ran wild about them, grinding its 
teeth. ’This is a sure way to death,' said Dorlas. 

'It is the only way, to death or to life,’ said Turambar, ’and delay will not make it seem 
more hopeful. Therefore follow me!’ And he went on before them, and by skill and 
hardihood, or by fate, he came across, and in the deep dark he turned to see who came 
after. A dark fonn stood beside him. ’Dorlas?’ he said. 

’No, it is I,’ said Hunthor. ’Dorlas failed at the crossing, I think. 

For a man may love war, and yet dread many things. He sits shivering on the shore, I 
guess; and may shame take him for his words to my kinsman.’ 

Now Turambar and Hunthor rested a little, but soon the night chilled them, for they were 
both drenched with water, and they began to seek a way along the stream northwards 
towards the lodgement of Glaurung. There the chasm grew darker and narrower, and as 
they felt their way forward they could see a flicker above them as of smouldering fire, 
and they heard the snarling of the Great Worm in his watchful sleep. Then they groped 
for a way up, to come nigh under the brink; for in that lay all their hope to come at their 
enemy beneath his guard. But so foul now was the reek that their heads were dizzy, and 
they slipped as they clambered, and clung to the tree-stems, and retched, forgetting in 
their misery all fear save the dread of falling into the teeth of Teiglin. 

Then Turambar said to Hunthor: ’We spend our waning strength to no avail. For till we be 
sure where the Dragon will pass, it is vain to climb.’ 

’But when we know,’ said Hunthor, ’then there will be no time to seek a way up out of the 
chasm.’ 

’Truly,’ said Turambar. ’But where all lies on chance, to chance we must trust.’ They 
halted therefore and waited, and out of the dark ravine they watched a white star far 
above creep across the faint strip of sky; and then slowly Turambar sank into a dream, in 
which all his will was given to clinging, though a black tide sucked and gnawed at his 
limbs. 



Suddenly there was a great noise and the walls of the chasm quivered and echoed. 
Turambar roused himself, and said to Hunthor: 'He stirs. The hour is upon us. Strike 
deep, for two must strike now for three!’ 

And with that Glaurung began his assault upon Brethil; and all passed much as Turambar 
had hoped. For now the Dragon crawled with slow weight to the edge of the cliff, and he 
did not turn aside, but made ready to spring over the chasm with his great forelegs and 
then draw his bulk after. Terror came with him; for he did not begin his passage right 
above, but a little to the northward, and the watchers from beneath could see the huge 
shadow of his head against the stars; and his jaws gaped, and he had seven tongues of 
fire. Then he sent forth a blast, so that all the ravine was filled with a red light, and black 
shadows flying among the rocks; but the trees before him withered and went up in smoke, 
and stones crashed down into the river. And thereupon he hurled himself forward, and 
grappled the further cliff with his mighty claws, and began to heave himself across. 

Now there was need to be bold and swift, for though Turambar and Hunthor had escaped 
the blast, since they were not right in Glaurung's path, they yet had to come at him, 
before he passed over, or all their hope failed. Heedless of peril therefore Turambar 
clambered along the cliff to come beneath him; but there so deadly was the heat and the 
stench that he tottered and would have fallen if Hunthor, following stoutly behind, had 
not seized his arm and steadied him. 

'Great heart!' said Turambar. 'Happy was the choice that took you for a helper!’ But even 
as he spoke, a great stone hurtled from above and smote Hunthor on the head, and he fell 
into the water, and so ended: not the least valiant of the House of Haleth. Then Turambar 
cried: 'Alas! It is ill to walk in my shadow! Why did I seek aid? For now you are alone, O 
Master of Doom, as you should have known it must be. Now conquer alone!' 

Then he summoned to him all his will, and all his hatred of the Dragon and his Master, 
and it seemed to him that suddenly he found a strength of heart and of body that he had 
not kn own before; and he climbed the cliff, from stone to stone, and root to root, until he 
seized at last a slender tree that grew a little beneath the lip of the chasm, and though its 
top was blasted it still held fast by its roots. And even as he steadied himself in a fork of 
its boughs, the midmost parts of the Dragon came above him, and swayed down with 
their weight almost upon his head, ere Glaurung could heave them up. Pale and wrinkled 
was their underside, and all dank with a grey slime, to which clung all manner of 
dropping filth; and it stank of death. Then Turambar drew the Black Sword of Beleg and 
stabbed upwards with all the might of his ann, and of his hate, and the deadly blade, long 
and greedy, went into the belly even to its hilts. 

Then Glaurung, feeling his death-pang, gave forth a scream, whereat all the woods were 
shaken, and the watchers at Nen Girith were aghast. 

Turambar reeled as from a blow, and slipped down, and his sword was tom from his 
grasp, and clave to the belly of the Dragon. For Glaurung in a great spasm bent up all his 



shuddering bulk and hurled it over the ravine, and there upon the further shore he 
writhed, screaming, lashing and coiling himself in his agony, until he had broken a great 
space all about him, and lay there at last in a smoke and a ruin, and was still. 

Now Turambar clung to the roots of the tree, stunned and well-nigh overcome. But he 
strove against himself and drove himself on, and half sliding and half climbing he came 
down to the river, and dared again the perilous crossing, crawling now on hands and feet, 
clinging, blinded with spray, until he came over at last, and climbed wearily up the cleft 
by which they had descended. Thus he came at length to the place of the dying Dragon, 
and he looked on his stricken enemy without pity, and was glad. 

There now Glaurung lay, with jaws agape; but all his fires were burned out, and his evil 
eyes were closed. He was stretched out in his length, and had rolled upon one side, and 
the hilts of Gurthang stood in his belly. Then the heart of Turambar rose high within him, 
and though the Dragon still breathed he would recover his sword, which if he prized it 
before was now worth to him all the treasure of Nargothrond. True proved the words 
spoken at its forging that nothing, great or small, should live that once it had bitten. 

Therefore going up to his foe he set foot upon his belly, and seizing the hilts of Gurthang 
he put forth his strength to withdraw it. And he cried in mockery of Glaurung's words at 
Nargothrond: 'Hail, Worm of Morgoth! Well met again! Die now and the darkness have 
you! Thus is Turin son of Hurin avenged.’ Then he wrenched out the sword, and even as 
he did so a spout of black blood followed it, and fell upon his hand, and his flesh was 
burned by the venom, so that he cried aloud at the pain. Thereat Glaurung stirred and 
opened his baleful eyes and looked upon Turambar with such malice that it seemed to 
him that he was smitten by an arrow; and for that and for the anguish of his hand he fell 
in a swoon, and lay as one dead beside the Dragon, and his sword was beneath him. 

Now the screams of Glaurung came to the people at Nen Girith, and they were filled with 
terror; and when the watchers beheld from afar the great breaking and burning that the 
Dragon made in his throes, they believed that he was trampling and destroying those that 
had assailed him. Then indeed they wished the miles longer that lay between them; but 
they dared not leave the high place where they were gathered, for they remembered the 
words of Turambar that, if Glaurung conquered, he would go first to Ephel Brandir. 
Therefore they watched in fear for any sign of his movement, but none were so hardy as 
to go down and seek for tidings in the place of the battle. And Niniel sat, and did not 
move, save that she shuddered and could not still her limbs; for when she heard the voice 
of Glaurung her heart died within her, and she felt her darkness creeping upon her again. 

Thus Brandir found her. For he came at last to the bridge over Celebros, slow and weary; 
all the long way alone he had limped on his crutch, and it was five leagues at the least 
from his home. Fear for Niniel had driven him on, and now the tidings that he learned 
were no worse than he had dreaded. 'The Dragon has crossed the river,' men told him, 

'and the Black Sword is surely dead, and those that went with him.’ Then Brandir stood 
by Niniel, and guessed her misery, and he yearned to her; but he thought nonetheless: 

'The Black Sword is dead, and Niniel lives.’ And he shuddered, for suddenly it seemed 



cold by the waters of Nen Girith; and he cast his cloak about Nlniel. But he found no 
words to say; and she did not speak. 


Time passed, and still Brandir stood silent beside her, peering into the night and listening; 
but he could see nothing, and could hear no sound but the falling of the waters of Nen 
Girith, and he thought: ’Now surely Glaurung has gone and has passed into Brethil.’ But 
he pitied his people no more, fools that had flouted his counsel, and had scorned him. 'Let 
the Dragon go to Amon Obel, and there will be time then to escape, and to lead Niniel 
away.' Whither, he scarce knew, for he had never journeyed beyond Brethil. 

At last he bent down and touched Niniel on the arm, and said to her: 'Time passes, Niniel! 
Come! It is time to go. If you will let me, I will lead you.' Then silently she arose, and 
took his hand, and they passed over the bridge and went down the path to the Crossings 
of Teiglin. But those that saw them moving as shadows in the dark knew not who they 
were, and cared not. And when they had gone some little way through the silent trees, the 
moon rose beyond Amon Obel, and the glades of the forest were filled with a grey light. 
Then Niniel halted and said to Brandir: 'Is this the way?’ 

And he answered: 'What is the way? For all our hope in Brethil is ended. 

We have no way, save to escape the Dragon, and flee far from him while there is yet 
time.’ 

Niniel looked at him in wonder and said: 'Did you not offer to lead me to him? Or would 
you deceive me? The Black Sword was my beloved and my husband, and only to find 
him do I go. What else could you think? Now do as you will, but I must hasten.’ 

And even as Brandir stood a moment amazed, she sped from him; and he called after her, 
crying: 'Wait, Niniel! Go not alone! You know not what you will find. I will come with 
you!’ But she paid no heed to him, and went now as though her blood burned her, which 
before had been cold; and though he followed as he could she passed soon out of his 
sight. Then he cursed his fate and his weakness; but he would not turn back. 

Now the moon rose white in the sky, and was near the full, and as Niniel came down 
from the upland towards the land near the river, it seemed to her that she remembered it, 
and feared it. For she was come to the Crossings of Teiglin, and Haudh-en-Elleth stood 
there before her, pale in the moonlight, with a black shadow cast athwart it; and out of the 
mound came a great dread. 

Then she turned with a cry and fled south along the river, and cast her cloak as she ran, as 
though casting off a darkness that clung to her; and beneath she was all clad in white, and 
she shone in the moon as she flitted among the trees. Thus Brandir above on the hill-side 
saw her, and turned to cross her course, if he could; and finding by fortune the narrow 
path that Turambar had used, for it left the more beaten road and went steeply down 
southward to the river, he came at last close behind her again. But though he called, she 



did not heed, or did not hear, and soon once more she passed on ahead; and so they drew 
near to the woods beside Cabed-en-Aras and the place of the agony of Glaurung. 


The moon was then riding in the south unclouded, and the light was cold and clear. 
Coming to the edge of the ruin that Glaurung had wrought, Niniel saw his body lying 
there, and his belly grey in the moon-sheen; but beside him lay a man. Then forgetting 
her fear she ran on amid the smouldering wrack and so came to Turambar. He was fallen 
on his side, and his sword lay beneath him, but his face was wan as death in the white 
light. Then she threw herself down by him weeping, and kissed him; and it seemed to her 
that he breathed faintly, but she thought it but a trickery of false hope, for he was cold, 
and did not move, nor did he answer her. And as she caressed him she found that his hand 
was blackened as if it had been scorched, and she washed it with her tears, and tearing a 
strip from her raiment she bound it about. But still he did not move at her touch, and she 
kissed him again, and cried aloud: Turambar, Turambar, come back! Hear me! Awake! 
For it is Niniel. 

The Dragon is dead, dead, and I alone am here by you.’ But he answered nothing. Her cry 
Brandir heard, for he had come to the edge of the ruin; but even as he stepped forward 
towards Niniel he was halted, and stood still. For at the cry of Niniel Glaurung stirred for 
the last time, and a quiver ran through all his body; and he opened his baleful eyes a slit, 
and the moon gleamed in them, as gasping he spoke: 'Hail, Nienor, daughter of Hurin. 

We meet again ere we end. I give you joy that you have found your brother at last. And 
now you shall know him: a stabber in the dark, treacherous to foes, faithless to friends, 
and a curse unto his kin, Turin son of Hurin! But the worst of all his deeds you shall feel 
in yourself.' 

Then Nienor sat as one stunned, but Glaurung died; and with his death the veil of his 
malice fell from her, and all her memory grew clearer before her, from day unto day, 
neither did she forget any of those things that had befallen her since she lay on Haudh-en- 
Elleth. And her whole body shook with horror and anguish. But Brandir, who had heard 
all, was stricken, and leaned against a tree. 

Then suddenly Nienor started to her feet, and stood pale as a wraith in the moon, and 
looked down on Turin, and cried: 'Farewell, O twice beloved! A Turin Turambar tunin' 
ambartanen: master of doom by doom mastered! O happy to be dead!’ Then distraught 
with woe and the horror that had overtaken her she fled wildly from that place; and 
Brandir stumbled after her, crying: 'Wait! 

Wait, Niniel!' 

One moment she paused, looking back with staring eyes. 'Wait?' she cried. 'Wait? That 
was ever your counsel. Would that I had heeded! But now it is too late. And now I will 
wait no more upon Middle-earth.’ And she sped on before him. 



Swiftly she came to the brink of Cabed-en-Aras, and there stood and looked on the loud 
water crying: ’Water, water! Take now Niniel Nienor daughter of Hurin; Mourning, 
Mourning daughter of Morwen! Take me and bear me down to the Sea!’ 

With that she cast herself over the brink: a flash of white swallowed in the dark chasm, a 
cry lost in the roaring of the river. 

The waters of Teiglin flowed on, but Cabed-en-Aras was no more: Cabed Naeramarth, 
the Leap of Dreadful Doom, thereafter it was named by men; for no deer would ever leap 
there again, and all living things shunned it, and no man would walk upon its shore. Last 
of men to look down into its darkness was Brandir son of Handir; and he turned away in 
horror, for his heart quailed, and though he hated now his life, he could not there take the 
death that he desired. Then his thought turned to Turin Turambar, and he cried: 'Do I hate 
you, or do I pity you? But you are dead. I owe you no thanks, taker of all that I had or 
would have. But my people owe you a debt. It is fitting that from me they should learn it.' 

And so he began to limp back to Nen Girith, avoiding the place of the Dragon with a 
shudder; and as he climbed the steep path again he came on a man that peered through 
the trees, and seeing him drew back. But he had marked his face in a gleam of the sinking 
moon. 

'Ha, Dorlas!' he cried. 'What news can you tell? How came you off alive? 

And what of my kinsman?’ 

'I know not,' answered Dorlas sullenly. 

'Then that is strange,' said Brandir. 

'If you will know,' said Dorlas, 'the Black Sword would have us ford the races of Teiglin 
in the dark. Is it strange that I could not? I am a better man with an axe than some, but I 
am not goat-footed.’ 

'So they went on without you to come at the Dragon?' said Brandir. 'But how when he 
passed over? At the least you would stay near, and would see what befell.’ 

But Dorlas made no answer, and stared only at Brandir with hatred in his eyes. Then 
Brandir understood, perceiving suddenly that this man had deserted his companions, and 
unmanned by shame had then hidden in the woods. 'Shame on you, Dorlas!' he said. 'You 
are the begetter of our woes: egging on the Black Sword, bringing the Dragon upon us, 
putting me to scorn, drawing Hunthor to his death, and then you flee to skulk in the 
woods!' And as he spoke another thought entered his mind, and he said in great anger: 
'Why did you not bring tidings? It was the least penance that you could do. Had you done 
so, the Lady Niniel would have had no need to seek them herself. She need never have 
seen the Dragon. She might have lived. Dorlas, I hate you!' 



’Keep your hate!' said Dorlas. 'It is as feeble as all your counsels. 


But for me the Ores would have come and hung you as a scarecrow in your garden. Take 
the name skulker to yourself!' And with that, being for his shame the readier to wrath, he 
aimed a blow at Brandir with his great fist, and so ended his life, before the look of 
amazement left his eyes: for Brandir drew his sword and hewed him his death-blow. 

Then for a moment he stood trembling, sickened by the blood; and casting down his 
sword he turned, and went on his way, bowed upon his crutch. 

As Brandir came to Nen Girith the pallid moon was gone down, and the night was fading; 
morning was opening in the east. The people that cowered there still by the bridge saw 
him come like a grey shadow in the dawn, and some called to him in wonder: 'Where 
have you been? Have you seen her? For the Lady Niniel is gone.’ 

'Yes,' said Brandir, 'she is gone. Gone, gone, never to return! But I am come to bring you 
tidings. Hear now, people of Brethil, and say if there was ever such a tale as the tale that I 
bear! The Dragon is dead, but dead also is Turambar at his side. And those are good 
tidings: yes, both are good indeed.’ 

Then the people murmured, wondering at his speech, and some said that he was mad; but 
Brandir cried: 'Hear me to the end! Niniel too is dead, Niniel the fair whom you loved, 
whom I loved dearest of all. She leaped from the brink of the Deer’s Leap, and the teeth 
of Teiglin have taken her. She is gone, hating the light of day. For this she learned before 
she fled: Hurin's children were they both, sister and brother. The Mormegil he was called, 
Turambar he named himself, hiding his past: 

Turin son of Hurin. Niniel we named her, not knowing her past: Nienor she was, daughter 
of Hurin. To Brethil they brought their dark doom's shadow. Here their doom has fallen, 
and of grief this land shall never again be free. Call it not Brethil, not the land of the 
Halethrim, but Sarch nia chin Hurin, Grave of the Children of Hurin!’ 

Then though they did not understand yet how this evil had come to pass, the people wept 
as they stood, and some said: 'A grave there is in Teiglin for Niniel the beloved, a grave 
shall there be for Turambar, most valiant of men. Our deliverer shall not be left to lie 
under the sky. Let us go to him.' 



CHAPTER XVIII 


THE DEATH OF TURIN 


Now even as Niniel fled away, Turin stirred, and it seemed to him that out of his deep 
darkness he heard her call to him far away; but as Glaurung died, the black swoon left 
him, and he breathed deep again, and sighed, and passed into a slumber of great 
weariness. But before dawn it grew bitter cold, and he turned in his sleep, and the hilts of 
Gurthang drove into his side, and suddenly he awoke. Night was going, and there was a 
breath of morning in the air; and he sprang to his feet, remembering his victory, and the 
burning venom on his hand. He raised it up, and looked at it, and marvelled. For it was 
bound about with a strip of white cloth, yet moist, and it was at ease; and he said to 
himself: ’Why should one tend me so, and yet leave me here to lie cold amid the wrack 
and the dragon-stench? What strange things have chanced?' 

Then he called aloud, but there was no answer. All was black and drear about him, and 
there was a reek of death. He stooped and lifted his sword, and it was whole, and the light 
of its edges was undimmed. 'Foul was the venom of Glaurung,’ he said, 'but you are 
stronger than I, Gurthang. All blood will you drink. Yours is the victory. But come! I 
must go seek for aid. My body is weary, and there is a chill in my bones.' 

Then he turned his back upon Glaurung and left him to rot; but as he passed from that 
place each step seemed more heavy, and he thought: 'At Nen Girith, maybe, I will find 
one of the scouts awaiting me. But would I were soon in my own house, and might feel 
the gentle hands of Niniel, and the good skill of Brandir!' And so at last, walking wearily, 
leaning on Gurthang, through the grey light of early day he came to Nen Girith, and even 
as men were setting forth to seek his dead body, he stood before the people. 

Then they gave back in terror, believing that it was his unquiet spirit, and the women 
wailed and covered their eyes. But he said: 'Nay, do not weep, but be glad! See! Do I not 
live? And have I not slain the Dragon that you feared?’ 

Then they turned upon Brandir, and cried: 'Fool, with your false tales, saying that he lay 
dead. Did we not say that you were mad?’ Then Brandir was aghast, and stared at Turin 
with fear in his eyes, and he could say nothing. 

But Turin said to him: 'It was you then that were there, and tended my hand? I thank you. 
But your skill is failing, if you cannot tell swoon from death.’ Then he turned to the 
people: 'Speak not so to him, fools all of you. Which of you would have done better? At 
least he had the heart to come down to the place of battle, while you sit wailing! 'But 
now, son of Handir, come! There is more that I would leam. Why are you here, and all 
this people, whom I left at the Ephel? If I may go into the peril of death for your sakes, 



may I not be obeyed when I am gone? And where is Niniel? At the least I may hope that 
you did not bring her hither, but left her where I bestowed her, in my house, with true 
men to guard it?' 

And when no one answered him, 'Come, say where is Niniel?' he cried. 

'For her first I would see; and to her first will I tell the tale of the deeds in the night.’ 

But they turned their faces from him, and Brandir said at last: 'Niniel is not here.’ 

'That is well then,’ said Turin. 'Then I will go to my home. Is there a horse to bear me? Or 
a bier would be better. I faint with my labours.’ 

'Nay, nay!' said Brandir in anguish of heart. 'Your house is empty. 

Niniel is not there. She is dead.’ 

But one of the women - the wife of Dorlas, who loved Brandir little - cried shrilly: 'Pay 
no heed to him, lord! For he is crazed. He came crying that you were dead, and called it 
good tidings. But you live. Why then should his tale of Niniel be true: that she is dead, 
and yet worse?' 

Then Turin strode towards Brandir: 'So my death was good tidings?' he cried. 'Yes, ever 
you did begrudge her to me, that I knew. Now she is dead, you say. And yet worse? What 
he have you begotten in your malice, Clubfoot? Would you slay us then with foul words, 
since you can wield no other weapon?’ 

Then anger drove pity from Brandir's heart, and he cried: 'Crazed? Nay, crazed are you, 
Black Sword of black doom! And all this dotard people. I do not lie! Niniel is dead, dead, 
dead! Seek her in Teiglin!' 

Then Turin stood still and cold. 'How do you know?' he said softly. 'How did you 
contrive it?' 

'I know because I saw her leap,’ answered Brandir. 'But the contriving was yours. She 
fled from you, Turin son of Hurin, and in Cabed-en-Aras she cast herself, that she might 
never see you again. Niniel! Niniel? 

Nay, Nienor daughter of Hurin.' 

Then Turin seized him and shook him; for in those words he heard the feet of his doom 
overtaking him, but in horror and fury his heart would not receive them, as a beast hurt to 
death that will wound ere it dies all that are near it. 


'Yes, I am Turin son of Hurin,’ he cried. 'So long ago you guessed. But nothing do you 
know of Nienor my sister. Nothing! She dwells in the Hidden Kingdom, and is safe. It is 



a lie of your own vile mind, to drive my wife witless, and now me. You limping evil - 
would you dog us both to death?' 

But Brandir shook him off. 'Touch me not!’ he said. 'Stay your raving. 

She that you name wife came to you and tended you, and you did not answer her call. But 
one answered for you. Glaurung the Dragon, who I deem bewitched you both to your 
doom. So he spoke, before he ended: "Nienor daughter of Hurin, here is your brother: 
treacherous to foes, faithless to friends, a curse unto his kin, Turin son of Hurin.'" Then 
suddenly a fey laughter seized on Brandir. 'On their deathbed men will speak true, they 
say,' he cackled. 

'And even a Dragon too, it seems. Turin son of Hurin, a curse unto your kin and unto all 
that harbour you!’ 

Then Turin grasped Gurthang and a fell light was in his eyes. 'And what shall be said of 
you, Clubfoot?' he said slowly. 'Who told her secretly behind my back my right name? 
Who brought her to the malice of the Dragon? Who stood by and let her die? Who came 
hither to publish this horror at the swiftest? Who would now gloat upon me? Do men 
speak true before death? Then speak it now quickly.' 

Then Brandir, seeing his death in Turin’s face, stood still and did not quail, though he had 
no weapon but his crutch; and he said: 'All that has chanced is a long tale to tell, and I am 
weary of you. But you slander me, son of Hurin. Did Glaurung slander you? If you slay 
me, then all shall see that he did not. Yet I do not fear to die, for then I will go to seek 
Niniel whom I loved, and perhaps I may find her again beyond the Sea.' 

'Seek Niniel!' cried Turin. 'Nay, Glaurung you shall find, and breed lies together. You 
shall sleep with the Worm, your soul's mate, and rot in one darkness!’ Then he lifted up 
Gurthang and hewed Brandir, and smote him to death. But the people hid their eyes from 
that deed, and as he turned and went from Nen Girith they fled from him in terror. 

Then Turin went as one witless through the wild woods, now cursing Middle-earth and 
all the life of Men, now calling upon Niniel. But when at last the madness of his grief left 
him he sat awhile and pondered all his deeds, and he heard himself crying: 'She dwells in 
the Hidden Kingdom, and is safe!’ And he thought that now, though all his life was in 
ruin, he must go thither; for all the lies of Glaurung had ever led him astray. Therefore he 
arose and went to the Crossings of Teiglin, and as he passed by Haudh-en-Elleth he cried: 
'Bitterly have I paid, O Finduilas! that ever I gave heed to the Dragon. Send me now 
counsel!' 

But even as he cried out he saw twelve huntsmen well-armed that came over the 
Crossings, and they were Elves; and as they drew near he knew one, for it was Mablung, 
chief huntsman of Thingol. And Mablung hailed him, crying: 'Turin! Well met at last. I 
seek you, and glad I am to see you living, though the years have been heavy on you.' 



'Heavy!' said Turin. 'Yes, as the feet of Morgoth. But if you are glad to see me living, you 
are the last in Middle-earth. Why so?' 

'Because you were held in honour among us,' answered Mablung; 'and though you have 
escaped many perils, I feared for you at the last. I watched the coming forth of Glaurung, 
and I thought that he had fulfilled his wicked purpose and was returning to his Master. 
But he turned towards Brethil, and at the same time I learned from wanderers in the land 
that the Black Sword of Nargothrond had appeared there again, and the Ores shunned its 
borders as death. Then I was filled with dread, and I said: "Alas! Glaurung goes where 
his Ores dare not, to seek out Turin." Therefore I came hither as swift as might be, to 
warn you and aid you.' 

'Swift, but not swift enough,' said Turin. 'Glaurung is dead.' 

Then the Elves looked at him in wonder, and said: 'You have slain the Great Wonn! 
Praised for ever shall your name be among Elves and Men!' 

'I care not,' said Turin. 'For my heart also is slain. But since you come from Doriath, give 
me news of my kin. For I was told in Dor-lomin that they had fled to the Hidden 
Kingdom.’ 

The Elves made no answer, but at length Mablung spoke: 'They did so indeed, in the year 
before the coming of the Dragon. But they are not there now, alas!' Then Turin's heart 
stood still, hearing the feet of doom that would pursue him to the end. 'Say on!’ he cried. 
'And be swift!’ 

'They went out into the wild seeking you,' said Mablung. 'It was against all counsel; but 
they would go to Nargothrond, when it was known that you were the Black Sword; and 
Glaurung came forth, and all their guard were scattered. Morwen none have seen since 
that day; but Nienor had a spell of dumbness upon her, and fled north into the woods like 
a wild deer, and was lost.’ Then to the wonder of the Elves Turin laughed loud and shrill. 
'Is not that a jest?' he cried. 'O the fair Nienor! So she ran from Doriath to the Dragon, 
and from the Dragon to me. What a sweet grace of fortune! Brown as a berry she was, 
dark was her hair; small and slim as an Elf-child, none could mistake her!' 

Then Mablung was amazed, and he said: 'But some mistake is here. Not such was your 
sister. She was tall, and her eyes were blue, her hair fine gold, the very likeness in 
woman’s form of Hurin her father. You cannot have seen her!' 

'Can I not, can I not, Mablung?' cried Turin. 'But why no! For see, I am blind! Did you 
not know? Blind, blind, groping since childhood in a dark mist of Morgoth! Therefore 
leave me! Go, go! Go back to Doriath, and may winter shrivel it! A curse upon 
Menegroth! And a curse on your errand! 


This only was wanting. Now comes the night! 



Then he fled from them, like the wind, and they were filled with wonder and fear. But 
Mablung said: 'Some strange and dreadful thing has chanced that we know not. Let us 
follow him and aid him if we may: for now he is fey and witless.' 

But Turin sped far before them, and came to Cabed-en-Aras, and stood still; and he heard 
the roaring of the water, and saw that all the trees near and far were withered, and their 
sere leaves fell mournfully, as though winter had come in the first days of summer. 

'Cabed-en-Aras, Cabed Naeramarth!' he cried. 'I will not defile your waters where Niniel 
was washed. For all my deeds have been ill, and the latest the worst.' 

Then he drew forth his sword, and said: 'Hail Gurthang, iron of death, you alone now 
remain! But what lord or loyalty do you know, save the hand that wields you? From no 
blood will you shrink. Will you take Turin Turambar? Will you slay me swiftly?' 

And from the blade rang a cold voice in answer: 'Yes, I will drink your blood, that I may 
forget the blood of Beleg my master, and the blood of Brandir slain unjustly. I will slay 
you swiftly.' 

Then Turin set the hilts upon the ground, and cast himself upon the point of Gurthang, 
and the black blade took his life. 

But Mablung came and looked on the hideous shape of Glaurung lying dead, and he 
looked upon Turin and was grieved, thinking of Hurin as he had seen him in the Nimaeth 
Amoediad, and the dreadful doom of his kin. As the Elves stood there, men came down 
from Nen Girith to look upon the Dragon, and when they saw to what end the life of 
Turin Turambar had come they wept; and the Elves learning at last the reason of Turin's 
words to them were aghast. Then Mablung said bitterly: 'I also have been meshed in the 
doom of the Children of Hurin, and thus with words have slain one that I loved.' 

Then they lifted up Turin, and saw that his sword was broken asunder. So passed all that 
he possessed. 

With toil of many hands they gathered wood and piled it high and made a great burning 
and destroyed the body of the Dragon, until he was but black ash and his bones beaten to 
dust, and the place of that burning was ever bare and barren thereafter. But Turin they 
laid in a high mound where he had fallen, and the shards of Gurthang were set beside 
him. And when all was done, and the minstrels of Elves and Men had made lament, 
telling of the valour of Turambar and the beauty of Niniel, a great grey stone was brought 
and set upon the mound; and thereon the Elves carved in the Runes of Doriath: 

TURIN TURAMBAR DAGNIR GLAURUNGA 

and beneath they wrote also: 


NIENOR NINIEL 



But she was not there, nor was it ever known whither the cold waters of Teiglin had taken 
her. 


Here ends the Tale of the Children of Hurin, longest of all the lays of Beleriand. 

After the deaths of Turin and Nienor Morgoth released Hurin from bondage in 
furtherance of his evil purpose. In the course of his wanderings he reached the Forest of 
Brethil, and came up in the evening from the Crossings of Teiglin to the place of the 
burning of Glaurung and the great stone standing on the brink of Cabed Naeramarth. Of 
what befell there this is told. 

But Hurin did not look at the stone, for he knew what was written there; and his eyes had 
seen that he was not alone. Sitting in the shadow of the stone there was a figure bent over 
its knees. Some homeless wanderer broken with age it seemed, too wayworn to heed his 
coming; but its rags were the remnants of a woman’s garb. At length as Hurin stood there 
silent she cast back her tattered hood and lifted up her face slowly, haggard and hungry as 
a long-hunted wolf. Grey she was, sharp-nosed with broken teeth, and with a lean hand 
she clawed at the cloak upon her breast. But suddenly her eyes looked into his, and then 
Hurin knew her; for though they were wild now and full of fear, a light still gleamed in 
them hard to endure: the elven-light that long ago had earned her her name, Eledhwen, 
proudest of mortal women in the days of old. 

'Eledhwen! Eledhwen!' Hurin cried; and she rose and stumbled forward, and he caught 
her in his arms. 

'You come at last,' she said. 'I have waited too long.' 

'It was a dark road. I have come as I could,’ he answered. 

'But you are late,' she said, 'too late. They are lost.' 

'I know,’ he said. 'But you are not.’ 

'Almost,' she said. 'I am spent utterly. I shall go with the sun. They are lost.' She clutched 
at his cloak. 'Little time is left,' she said. 

'If you know, tell me! How did she find him?' 

But Hurin did not answer, and he sat beside the stone with Morwen in his anns; and they 
did not speak again. The sun went down, and Morwen sighed and clasped his hand and 
was still; and Hurin knew that she had died. 



GENEALOGIES 


The House of Hador amp; the People of Haleth «genealogical chart showing: 

Hador Goldenhead, Lord of Dor-lomin, had 2 children, Galdor and Gloredhel, while 
Halinir of Brethil had 2 children, Haldir and Hareth. 

Haldir of Brethil married Gloredhel, and had a child Handir of Brethil, who had a child 
Brandir the Lame. 

Hareth of Brethil married Galdor the Tall, and had 2 children, Huor and Hurin. Huor 
married Rian, they had a child Tuor, who married Idril, daughter of Turgon, and had a 
child Earendil, who had a child Elrond of Rivendell. Hurin married Morwen of the House 
of Beor, and they had 3 children, Turin (Turambar), Urwen (Lalaith), and Nienor 
(Niniel).» 

The House of Beor 

«genealogical chart showing: 

Bregor had 2 children, Barahir and Bregolas. Barahir had a child Beren (One-hand), who 
married Luthicn (Tinuviel, daughter of Thingol), and they had a child Dior, who had a 
child Elwing who married Earendil, and they had a child Elrond of Rivendell. 

Bregolas had 2 children Belegund and Baragund. Belegund had a child Rian who married 
Huor of Dor-lomin and they had a child Tuor, who married Idril, daughter of Turgon, and 
had a child Earendil, who had a child Elrond of Rivendell. 

Baragund had a child Morwen, who married Hurin of Dor-lomin, and they had 3 
children, Turin (Turambar), Urwen (Lalaith), and Nienor (Niniel).» 

The Princes of the Noldor 

«genealogical chart showing: 

Finwehad 3 children, Feanor, Fingolfin, and Finargin. 

Feanor had seven sons. Fingolfin had 3 children, Fingon, Turgon and Aredhel. Fingon 
had no children. Turgon had a child Idril, who married Tuor of the House of Hador, and 
they had a child Earendil who had a child Elrond of Rivendell. Aredhel married Eol, the 
Dark Elf, and they had a child Maeglin. 

Finargin had 5 children, Finrod (Felagund), Orodeth (who had a child Finduilas), Angrod, 
Aegnor, and Galadriel of Lothlorien.» 



APPENDIX 


(I) THE EVOLUTION OF THE GREAT TALES These interrelated but independent 
stories had from far back stood out from the long and complex history of Valar, Elves 
and Men in Valinor and the Great Lands; and in the years that followed his abandonment 
of the Lost Tales before they were completed my father turned away from prose 
composition and began work on a long poem with the title Turin son of Hurin and 
Glorund the Dragon, later changed in a revised version to The Children of Hurin. This 
was in the earlier 1920s, when he held appointments at the University of Leeds. For this 
poem he employed the ancient English alliterative metre (the verse form of Beowulf and 
other Anglo-Saxon poetry), imposing on modem English the demanding patterns of stress 
and ’initial rhyme' observed by the old poets: a skill in which he achieved great mastery, 
in very different modes, from the dramatic dialogue of The Homecoming of Beorhtnoth 
to the elegy for the men who died in the battle of the Pelennor Fields. The alliterative 
Children of Hurin was by far the longest of his poems in this metre, running to well over 
two thousand lines; yet he conceived it on so lavish a scale that even so he had reached 
no further in the narrative than the assault of the Dragon on Nargothrond when he 
abandoned it. With so much more of the Lost Tale still to come it would have needed on 
this scale many more thousands of lines; while a second version, abandoned at an earlier 
point in the narrative, is about double the length of the first version to that same point. 

In that part of the legend of the Children of Hurin that my father achieved in the 
alliterative poem the old story in The Book of Lost Tales was substantially extended and 
elaborated. Most notably, it was now that the great underground fortress-city of 
Nargothrond emerged, and the wide lands of its dominion (a central element not only in 
the legend of Turin and Nienor but in the history of the Elder Days of Middle-earth), with 
a description of the farmlands of the Elves of Nargothrond that gives a rare suggestion of 
the 'arts of peace' in the ancient world, such glimpses being few and far between. Coming 
south along the river Narog Turin and his companion (Gwindor in the text in this book) 
found the lands near the entrance to Nargothrond to all appearance deserted: ? they came 
to a country kindly tended; through flowery frith and fair acres they fared, and found of 
folk empty the leas and leasows and the lawns of Narog, the teeming tilth by trees 
enfolded twixt hills and river. The hoes unrecked in the fields were flung, and fallen 
ladders in the long grass lay of the lush orchards; every tree there turned its tangled head 
and eyed them secretly, and the ears listened of the nodding grasses; though noontide 
glowed on land and leaf, their limbs were chilled. 

And so the two travellers came to the doors of Nargothrond, in the gorge of the Narog: 
there steeply stood the strong shoulders of the hills, o’erhanging the hurrying water; there 
shrouded in trees a sheer terrace, wide and winding, worn to smoothness, was fashioned 
in the face of the falling slope. 

Doors there darkly dim gigantic were hewn in the hillside; huge their timbers, and their 
posts and lintels of ponderous stone. 



Seized by Elves they were haled through the portal, which closed behind them: 


Ground and grumbled on its great hinges the door gigantic; with din ponderous it clanged 
and closed like clap of thunder, and echoes awful in empty corridors there ran and 
rumbled under roofs unseen; the light was lost. Then led them on down long and winding 
lanes of darkness their guards guiding their groping feet, till the faint flicker of fiery 
torches flared before them; fitful murmur as of many voices in meeting thronged they 
heard as they hastened. High sprang the roof. 

Round a sudden turning they swung amazed, and saw a solemn silent conclave, where 
hundreds hushed in huge twilight neath distant domes darkly vaulted them wordless 
waited. 

But in the text of The Children of Hurin given in this book we are told no more than this 
(p. 158): 

And now they arose, and departing from Eithel Ivrin they journeyed southward along the 
banks of Narog, until they were taken by scouts of the Elves and brought as prisoners to 
the hidden stronghold. 

Thus did Turin come to Nargothrond. 

How did this come about? In what follows I shall try to answer that question. 

It seems virtually certain that all that my father wrote of his alliterative poem on Turin 
was accomplished at Leeds, and that he abandoned it at the end of 1924 or early in 1925; 
but why he did so must remain unknown. What he then turned to is however not 
mysterious: in the summer of 1925 he embarked on a new poem in a wholly different 
metre, octosyllabic rhyming couplets, entitled The Lay of Leithian 'Release from 
Bondage’. Thus he took up now another of the tales that he described years later, in 1951, 
as I have already noted, as full in treatment, independent, and yet linked to 'the general 
history'; for the subject of The Lay of Leithian is the legend of Beren and Luthicn. He 
worked on this second long poem for six years, and in its turn abandoned it, in September 
1931, having written more than 4000 lines. As does the alliterative Children of Hurin 
which it succeeded and supplanted, this poem represents a substantial advance in the 
evolution of the legend from the original Lost Tale of Beren and Luthicn. 

While The Lay of Leithian was in progress, in 1926, he wrote a 'Sketch of the 
Mythology', expressly intended for R.W. Reynolds, who had been his teacher at King 
Edward's school in Binningham, 'to explain the background of the alliterative version of 
Turin and the Dragon’. This brief manuscript, which would run to some twenty printed 
pages, was avowedly written as a synopsis, in the present tense and in a succinct style; 
and yet it was the starting-point of the subsequent 'Silmarillion' versions (though that 
name was not yet given). But while the entire mythological conception was set out in this 
text, the tale of Turin has very evidently pride of place - and indeed the title in the 



manuscript is 'Sketch of the mythology with especial reference to the "Children of 
Hurin'", in keeping with his purpose in writing it. 


In 1930 there followed a much more substantial work, the Quenta Noldorinwa (the 
History of the Noldor: for the history of the Noldorin Elves is the central theme of 'The 
Silmarillion'). This was directly derived from the 'Sketch', and while much enlarging the 
earlier text and writing in a more finished manner, my father nonetheless still saw the 
Quenta very much as a summarising work, an epitome of far richer narrative conceptions: 
as is in any case clearly shown by the sub-title that he gave to it, in which he declared that 
it was 'a brief history [of the Noldor] drawn from the Book of Lost Tales'. 

It is to be borne in mind that at that time the Quenta represented (if only in a somewhat 
bare structure) the full extent of my father's 'imagined world’. It was not the history of the 
First Age, as it afterwards became, for there was as yet no Second Age, nor Third Age; 
there was no Numenor, no hobbits, and of course no Ring. The history ended with the 
Great Battle, in which Morgoth was finally defeated by the other Gods (the Valar), and 
by them 'thrust through the Door of Timeless Night into the Void, beyond the Walls of 
the World'; and my father wrote at the end of the Quenta: 'Such is the end of the tales of 
the days before the days in the Northern regions of the Western world.’ 

Thus it will seem strange indeed that the Quenta of 1930 was nonetheless the only 
completed text (after the 'Sketch') of 'The Silmarillion’ that he ever made; but as was so 
often the case, external pressures governed the evolution of his work. The Quenta was 
followed later in the 1930s by a new version in a beautiful manuscript, bearing at last the 
title Quenta Silmarillion, History of the Silmarilli. This was, or was to be, much longer 
than the preceding Quenta Noldorinwa, but the conception of the work as essentially a 
summarising of myths and legends (themselves of an altogether different nature and 
scope if fully told) was by no means lost, and is again defined in the title: 'The Quenta 
Silmarillion? This is a history in brief drawn from many older tales; for all the matters 
that it contains were of old, and still are among the Eldar of the West, recounted more 
fully in other histories and songs.’ 

It seems at least probable that my father's view of The Silmarillion did actually arise from 
the fact that what may be called the 'Quenta phase' of the work in the 1930s began in a 
condensed synopsis serving a particular purpose, but then underwent expansion and 
refinement in successive stages until it lost the appearance of a synopsis, but nonetheless 
retaining, from the form of its origin, a characteristic 'evenness' of tone. I have written 
elsewhere that 'the compendious or epitomising form and manner of The Silmarillion, 
with its suggestion of ages of poetry and "lore" behind it, strongly evokes a sense of 
"untold tales", even in the telling of them; "distance" is never lost. There is no narrative 
urgency, the pressure and fear of the immediate and unknown event. We do not actually 
see the Silmarils as we see the Ring.’ 

However, the Quenta Silmarillion in this fonn came to an abrupt and, as it turned out, a 
decisive end in 1937. The Hobbit was published by George Allen and Unwin on 21 
September of that year, and not long afterwards, at the invitation of the publisher, my 



father sent in a number of his manuscripts, which were delivered in London on 15 
November 1937. Among these was the Quenta Silmarillion, so far as it then went, ending 
in the middle of a sentence at the foot of a page. But while it was gone he continued the 
narrative in draft fonn as far as Turin's flight from Doriath and his taking up the life of an 
outlaw: passing the borders of the realm he gathered to himself a company of such 
houseless and desperate folk as could be found in those evil days lurking in the wild; and 
their hands were turned against all who came in their path, Elves, Men, or Ores. 

This is the forerunner of the passage, in the text in this book p. 98, at the beginning of 
Turin among the Outlaws. 

My father had reached these words when the Quenta Silmarillion and the other 
manuscripts were returned to him; and three days later, on 19 December 1937, he wrote 
to Allen and Unwin saying: 'I have written the first chapter of a new story about Hobbits - 
"A long expected party".’ 

It was at this point that the continuous and evolving tradition of The Silmarillion in the 
summarising, Quenta mode came to an end, brought down in full flight, at Turin's 
departure from Doriath. The further history from that point remained during the years that 
followed in the simple, compressed, and undeveloped fonn of the Quenta of 1930, 
frozen, as it were, while the great structures of the Second and Third Ages arose with the 
writing of The Lord of the Rings. But that further history was of cardinal importance in 
the ancient legends, for the concluding stories (deriving from the original Book of Lost 
Tales) told of the disastrous history of Hurin, father of Turin, after Morgoth released him, 
and of the ruin of the Elvish kingdoms of Nargothrond, Doriath, and Gondolin, of which 
Gimli chanted in the mines of Moria many thousands of years afterwards. 

The world was fair, the mountains tall, 

In Elder Days before the fall 

Of mighty kings in Nargothrond 

And Gondolin, who now beyond 

The Western Seas have passed away? 

And this was to be the crown and completion of the whole: the doom of the Noldorin 
Elves in their long struggle against the power of Morgoth, and the parts that Hurin and 
Turin played in that history; ending with the tale of Earendil, who escaped from the 
burning ruin of Gondolin. 

When, many years later, early in 1950, The Lord of the Rings was finished, my father 
turned with energy and confidence to 'the Matter of the Elder Days', now become 'the 
First Age'; and in the years immediately following he took out many old manuscripts 
from where they had long lain. Turning to The Silmarillion, he covered at this time the 



beautiful manuscript of the Quenta Silmarillion with corrections and expansions; but that 
revision ceased in 1951 before he reached the story of Turin, where the Quenta 
Silmarillion was abandoned in 1937 with the advent of 'the new story about Hobbits'. 

He began a revision of the Lay of Leithian (the poem in rhyming verse telling the story of 
Beren and Luthien that was abandoned in 1931) that soon became almost a new poem, of 
much greater accomplishment; but this petered out and was ultimately abandoned. He 
embarked on what was to be a long saga of Beren and Luthien in prose, closely based on 
the rewritten form of the Lay; but that too was abandoned. Thus his desire, shown in 
successive attempts, to render the first of the 'great tales' on the scale that he sought was 
never fulfilled. 

At that time also he turned again at last to the 'great tale' of the Fall of Gondolin, still 
extant only in the Lost Tale from some thirty-five years before and in the few pages 
devoted to it in the Quenta Noldorinwa of 1930. This was to be the presentation, when he 
was at the height of his powers, in close narrative and in all its bearings, of the 
extraordinary tale that he had read to the Essay Society of his college at Oxford in 1920, 
and which remained throughout his life a vital element in his imagination of the Elder 
Days. The special link with the tale of Turin lies in the brothers Hurin, father of Turin, 
and Huor, father of Tuor. Hurin and Huor in their youth entered the Elvish city of 
Gondolin, hidden within a circle of high mountains, as is told in The Children of Hurin 
(p. 35); and afterwards, in the battle of Unnumbered Tears, they met again with Turgon, 
King of Gondolin, and he said to them (p. 58): 'Not long now can Gondolin remain 
hidden, and being discovered it must fall.’ And Huor replied: 'Yet if it stands only a little 
while, then out of your house shall come the hope of Elves and Men. This I say to you, 
lord, with the eyes of death: though we part here for ever, and I shall not look on your 
white walls again, from you and from me a new star shall arise.’ 

This prophecy was fulfilled when Tuor, first cousin to Turin, came to Gondolin and 
wedded Idril, daughter of Turgon; for their son was Earendil: the 'new star', 'hope of 
Elves and Men’, who escaped from Gondolin. In the prose saga of The Fall of Gondolin 
that was to be, begun probably in 1951, my father recounted the journey of Tuor and his 
Elvish companion, Voronwe, who guided him; and on the way, alone in the wilderness, 
they heard a cry in the woods: 

And as they waited one came through the trees, and they saw that he was a tall Man, 
anned, clad in black, with a long sword drawn; and they wondered, for the blade of the 
sword also was black, but the edges shone bright and cold. 

That was Turin, hastening from the sack of Nargothrond (pp. 180-1); but Tuor and 
Voronwe did not speak to him as he passed, and 'they knew not that Nargothrond had 
fallen, and this was Turin son of Hurin, the Blacksword. Thus only for a moment, and 
never again, did the paths of those kinsmen, Turin and Tuor, draw together.’ 

In the new tale of Gondolin my father brought Tuor to the high place in the Encircling 
Mountains from where the eye could travel across the plain to the Hidden City; and there, 



grievously, he stopped, and never went further. And so in The Fall of Gondolin likewise 
he failed of his purpose; and we see neither Nargothrond nor Gondolin with his later 
vision. 

I have said elsewhere that 'with the completion of the great "intrusion" and departure of 
The Lord of the Rings, it seems that he returned to the Elder Days with a desire to take up 
again the far more ample scale with which he had begun long before, in The Book of Lost 
Tales. The completion of the Quenta Silmarillion remained an aim; but the "great tales", 
vastly developed from their original fonns, from which its later chapters should be 
derived, were never achieved.’ These remarks are true of the 'great tale' of The Children 
of Hurin as well; but in this case my father achieved much more, even though he was 
never able to bring a substantial part of the later and hugely extended version to final and 
finished form. 

At the same time as he turned again to the Lay of Leithian and The Fall of Gondolin he 
began his new work on The Children of Hurin, not with Turin's childhood, but with the 
latter part of the story, the culmination of his disastrous history after the destruction of 
Nargothrond. This is the text in this book from The Return of Turin to Dor-lomin (p. 182) 
to his death. Why my father should have proceeded in this way, so unlike his usual 
practice of starting again at the beginning, I cannot explain. But in this case he left also 
among his papers a mass of later but undated writing concerned with the story from 
Turin's birth to the sack of Nargothrond, with great elaboration of the old versions and 
expansion into narrative previously unknown. 

By far the greater part of this work, if not all of it, belongs to the time following the 
actual publication of The Lord of the Rings, In those years The Children of Hurin became 
for him the dominant story of the end of the Elder Days, and for a long time he devoted 
all his thought to it. 

But he found it hard now to impose a firm narrative structure as the tale grew in 
complexity of character and event; and indeed in one long passage the story is contained 
in a patchwork of disconnected drafts and plot-outlines. 

Yet The Children of Hurin in its latest form is the chief narrative fiction of Middle-earth 
after the conclusion of The Lord of the Rings; and the life and death of Turin is portrayed 
with a convincing power and an immediacy scarcely to be found elsewhere among the 
peoples of Middle-earth. For this reason I have attempted in this book, after long study of 
the manuscripts, to fonn a text that provides a continuous narrative from start to finish, 
without the introduction of any elements that are not authentic in conception. 



THE COMPOSITION OF THE TEXT 


In Unfinished Tales, published more than a quarter of a century ago, I presented a partial 
text of the long version of this tale, known as the Narn, from the Elvish title Nam i chin 
Hurin, the Tale of the Children of Hiirin. But that was one element in a large book of 
various content, and the text was very incomplete, in keeping with the general purpose 
and nature of the book: for I omitted a number of substantial passages (and one of them 
very long) where the Narn text and that in the much briefer version in The Silmarillion 
are very similar, or where I decided that no distinctive ’long' text could be provided. 

The form of the Nam in this book therefore differs in a number of ways from that in 
Unfinished Tales, some of them deriving from the far more thorough study of the 
formidable complex of manuscripts that I made after that book was published. This led 
me to different conclusions about the relations and sequence of some of the texts, chiefly 
in the extremely confusing evolution of the legend in the period of ’Turin among the 
Outlaws'. A description and explanation of the composition of this new text of The 
Children of Hurin follows here. 

An important element in all this is the peculiar status of the published Silmarillion; for as 
I have mentioned in the first part of this Appendix my father abandoned the Quenta 
Silmarillion at the point that he had reached (Turin's becoming an outlaw after his flight 
from Doriath) when he began The Lord of the Rings in 1937. In the formation of a 
narrative for the published work I made much use of The Annals of Beleriand, originally 
a 'Tale of Years', but which in successive versions grew and expanded into annalistic 
narrative in parallel with the successive 'Silmarillion' manuscripts, and which extended to 
the freeing of Hurin by Morgoth after the deaths of Turin and Nienor. 

Thus the first passage that I omitted from the version of the Nam i chin Hurin in 
Unfinished Tales (p. 5 8 and note 1) is the account of the sojourn of Hurin and Huor in 
Gondolin in their youth; and I did so simply because the tale is told in The Silmarillion 
(pp. 158-9). But my father did in fact write two versions: one of them was expressly 
intended for the opening of the Narn, but was very closely based on a passage in The 
Annals of Beleriand, and indeed for most of its length differs little. In The Silmarillion I 
used both texts, but here I have followed the Narn version. 

The second passage that I omitted from the Narn in Unfinished Tales (pp. 65-6 and note 
2) is the account of the Battle of Unnumbered Tears, an omission made for the same 
reason; and here again my father wrote two versions, one in the Annals, and a second, 
much later but with the Annals text in front of him, and for the most part closely 
followed. This second narrative of the great battle was, again, expressly intended as a 
constituent element in the Nam (the text is headed Narn II, i.e. the second section of the 
Nam), and states at the outset (p. 52 in the text in this book): 'Here there shall be 
recounted only those deeds which bear upon the fate of the House of Hador and the 
children of Hurin the Steadfast.' In pursuit of this my father retained from the Annals 
account only the description of the 'westward battle' and the destruction of the host of 



Fingon; and by this simplification and reduction of the narrative he altered the course of 
the battle as told in the Annals. In The Silmarillion I of course followed the Annals, 
though with some features taken from the Nam version; but in this book I have kept to 
the text that my father thought appropriate to the Narn as a whole. 

From Turin in Doriath the new text is a good deal changed in relation to that in 
Unfinished Tales. There is here a range of writing, much of it very rough, concerned with 
the same narrative elements at different stages of development, and in such a case it is 
obviously possible to take different views on how the original material should be treated. 

I have come to think that when I composed the text in Unfinished Tales I allowed myself 
more editorial freedom than was necessary. In this book I have reconsidered the original 
manuscripts and reconstituted the text, in many (usually very minor) places restoring the 
original words, introducing sentences or brief passages that should not have been omitted, 
correcting a few errors, and making different choices among the original readings. 

As regards the structure of the narrative in this period of Turin's life, from his flight out 
of Doriath to the lair of the outlaws on Arnon Rudh, my father had certain narrative 
'elements’ in mind: the trial of Turin before Thingol; the gifts of Thingol and Melian to 
Beleg; the maltreatment of Beleg by the outlaws in Turin's absence; the meetings of 
Turin and Beleg. He moved these 'elements' in relation to each other, and placed passages 
of dialogue in different contexts; but found it difficult to compose them into a settled 
'plot' - 'to find out what really happened’. But it seems now clear to me, after much further 
study, that my father did achieve a satisfying structure and sequence for this part of the 
story before he abandoned it; and also that the narrative in much reduced form that I 
composed for the published Silmarillion conforms to this - but with one difference. 

In Unfinished Tales there is a third gap in the narrative on p. 96: the story breaks off at 
the point where Beleg, having at last found Turin among the outlaws, cannot persuade 
him to return to Doriath (pp. n 5-19 in the new text), and does not take up again until the 
outlaws encounter the Petty-dwarves. Here I referred again to The Silmarillion for the 
filling of the gap, noting that there follows in the story Beleg's farewell to Turin and his 
return to Menegroth 'where he received the sword Anglachel from Thingol and lembas 
from Melian’. But it is in fact demonstrable that my father rejected this; for 'what really 
happened' was that Thingol gave Anglachel to Beleg after the trial of Turin, when Beleg 
first set off to find him. In the present text therefore the gift of the sword is placed at that 
point (p. 96), and there is no mention there of the gift of lembas. In the later passage, 
when Beleg returned to Menegroth after the finding of Turin, there is of course no 
reference to Anglachel in the new text, but only to Melian's gift. 

This is a convenient point to notice that I have omitted from the text two passages that I 
included in Unfinished Tales but which are parenthetical to the narrative: these are the 
history of how the Dragon-helm came into the possession of Hador of Dor-lomin 
(Unfinished Tales, p. 75), and the origin of Saeros (Unfinished Tales, p. 77). It seems, 
incidentally, certain from a closer understanding of the relations of the manuscripts that 
my father rejected the name Saeros and replaced it by Orgol, which by 'linguistic 



accident' coincides with Old English orgol, orgel 'pride'. But it seems to me too late now 
to remove Saeros. 


The major lacuna in the narrative as given in Unfinished Tales (p. 104) is filled in the 
new text on pages 141 to 181, from the end of the section Of Mim the Dwarf and through 
The Land of Bow and Helm, The Death of Beleg, Turin in Nargothrond, and The Fall of 
Nargothrond. 

There is a complex relationship in this part of the 'Turin saga’ between the original 
manuscripts, the story as it is told in The Silmarillion, the disconnected passages 
collected in the appendix to the Narn in Unfinished Tales, and the new text in this book. I 
have always supposed that it was my father's general intention, in the fullness of time, 
when he had achieved to his satisfaction the 'great tale’ of Turin, to derive from it a much 
briefer form of the story in what one may call 'the Silmarillion mode’. But of course this 
did not happen; and so I undertook, now more than thirty years ago, the strange task of 
trying to simulate what he did not do: the writing of a 'Silmarillion' version of the latest 
form of the story, but deriving this from the heterogeneous materials of the 'long version’, 
the Narn. That is Chapter 2 1 in the published Silmarillion. 

Thus the text in this book that fills the long gap in the story in Unfinished Tales is derived 
from the same original materials as is the corresponding passage in The Silmarillion (pp. 
204-15), but they are used for a different purpose in each case, and in the new text with a 
better understanding of the labyrinth of drafts and notes and their sequence. Much in the 
original manuscripts that was omitted or compressed in The Silmarillion remains 
available; but where there was nothing to be added to the Silmarillion version (as in the 
tale of the death of Beleg, derived from the Annals of Beleriand) that version is simply 
repeated. 

In the result, while I have had to introduce bridging passages here and there in the piecing 
together of different drafts, there is no element of extraneous 'invention' of any kind, 
however slight, in the longer text here presented. The text is nonetheless artificial, as it 
could not be otherwise: the more especially since this great body of manuscript represents 
a continual evolution in the actual story. Drafts that are essential to the fonnation of an 
uninterrupted narrative may in fact belong to an earlier stage. Thus, to give an example 
from an earlier point, a primary text for the story of the coming of Turin's band to the hill 
of Arnon Rudh, the dwelling place that they found upon it and their life there, and the 
ephemeral success of the land of Dor-Cuarthol, was written before there was any 
suggestion of the Petty-dwarves; and indeed a fully-developed description of Mim's 
house beneath the summit appears before Mim himself. 

In the remainder of the story, from Turin's return to Dor-lomin, to which my father gave a 
finished fonn, there are naturally very few differences from the text in Unfinished Tales. 
But there are two matters of detail in the account of the attack on Glaurung at Cabed-en- 
Aras where I have emended the original words and which should be explained. 



The first concerns the geography. It is said (p. 230) that when Turin and his companions 
set out from Nen Girith on the fateful evening they did not go straight towards the 
Dragon, lying on the further side of the ravine, but took first the path towards the 
Crossings of Teiglin; and ’then, before they came so far, they turned southward by a 
narrow track' and went through the woods above the river towards Cabed-en-Aras. As 
they approached, in the original text of the passage, 'the first stars glimmered in the east 
behind them’. 

When I prepared the text for Unfinished Tales I did not observe that this could not be 
right, since they were certainly not moving in a westerly direction, but east, or southeast, 
away from the Crossings, and the first stars in the east must have been before them, not 
behind them. 

When discussing this in The War of the Jewels (1994, p. 157) I accepted the suggestion 
that the ’narrow track' going southward turned again westward to reach the Teiglin. But 
this seems to me now to be improbable, as being without point in the narrative, and that a 
much simpler solution is to emend 'behind them’ to 'before them’, as I have done in the 
new text. 

The sketch map that I drew in Unfinished Tales (p. 149) to illustrate the lie of the land is 
not in fact well oriented. It is seen from my father's map of Beleriand, and is so 
reproduced in my map for The Sihnarillion, that Arnon Obel was almost due east from 
the Crossings of Teiglin ('the moon rose beyond Arnon Obel’, p. 241), and the Teiglin 
was flowing south-east or south-southeast in the ravines. I have now redrawn the sketch 
map, and have entered also the approximate place of Cabed-en-Aras (it is said in the text, 
p. 225, that 'right in the path of Glaurung there lay now one of these gorges, by no means 
the deepest, but the narrowest, just north of the inflow of Celebros'). 

The second matter concerns the story of the slaying of Glaurung at the crossing of the 
ravine. There are here a draft and a final version. In the draft, Turin and his companions 
climbed up the further side of the chasm until they came beneath the brink; they hung 
there as the night passed, and Turin 'strove with dark dreams of dread in which all his 
will was given to clinging and holding’. When day came Glaurung prepared to cross at a 
point 'many paces to the northward', and so Turin had to climb down to the river-bed and 
then up the cliff again to get beneath the Dragon's belly. 

In the final version (p. 23 5) Turin and Hunthor were only part way up the further side 
when Turin said that they were wasting their strength in climbing up now, before they 
knew where Glaurung would cross; 'they halted therefore and waited’. It is not said that 
they descended from where they were when they ceased to climb, and the passage 
concerning Turin's dream 'in which all his will was given to clinging’ reappears from the 
draft text. But in the revised story there was no need for them to cling: they could and 
surely would have descended to the bottom and waited there. In fact, this is what they 
did: it is said in the final text {Unfinished Tales, p. 134) that they were not standing in 
Glaurung's path and that Turin 'clambered along the water-edge to come beneath him’. It 
seems then that the final story carries an unneeded trait from the previous draft. To give it 



coherence I have emended (p. 236) 'since they were not standing right in Glaurung's path’ 
to 'since they were not right in Glaurung's path', and 'clambered along the water-edge' to 
'clambered along the cliff. 


These are small matters in themselves, but they clarify what are perhaps the most sharply 
visualised scenes in the legends of the Elder Days, and one of the greatest events. 



LIST OF NAMES 

IN 

THE TALE OF THE CHILDREN OF HURIN 


Names that appear in the map of Beleriand are followed by an asterisk. 

Adanedhel: ’Elf-man’, name given to Turin in Nargothrond. 

Aerin: A kinswoman of Hurin in Dor-lomin, taken as wife by Brodda the Easterling. 

Agarwaen: ’Bloodstained’, name taken by Turin when he came to Nargothrond. 

Ainur: ’The Holy Ones', the first beings created by Iluvatar, who were before the World: 
the Valar and the Maiar ('spirits of the same order as the Valar but of less degree'). 

Algund: Man of Dor-lomin, member of the outlaw band that Turin joined. 

Arnon Darthir*: A peak in the range of Ered Wethrin south of Dor-lomin. 

Arnon Ethir: 'Hill of Spies', a great earthwork raised by Finrod Felagund a league to the 
east of Nargothrond. 

Arnon Obel*: A hill in the midst of the Forest of Brethil, on which was built Ephel 
Brandir. 

Arnon Rudh*: 'The Bald Hill', a lonely height in the lands south of Brethil, abode of 
Mim. 

Anach*: Pass leading down from Taur-nu-Fuin at the western end of Ered Gorgoroth. 

Androg: Man of Dor-lomin, a leader of the outlaw band that Turin joined. 

Anfauglith*: 'Gasping Dust', the great plain north of Taur-nu-Fuin, once grassy and 
named Ard-galen, but transformed into a desert by Morgoth in the Battle of Sudden 
Flame. 

Angband: The great fortress of Morgoth in the North-west of Middle-earth. 

Anglachel: Beleg's sword, the gift of Thingol; after its reforging for Turin named 
Gurthang. 

Angrod: Third son of Finarfin, slain in the Dagor Bragollach. 

Anguirel: Eol’s sword. 



Aranruth: ’King's Ire', Thingol's sword. 

Arda: The Earth. 

Aredhel: Sister of Turgon, wife of Eol. 

Anninas: Noldorin Elf who came with Gelrnir to Nargothrond to warn Orodreth of its 
peril. 

Anoch: Hurin's horse. 

Arvcrnicn*: The coastlands of Beleriand west of Sirion’s mouths; named in Bilbo's song 
in Rivendell. 

Asgon: Man of Dor-lomin who aided Turin's escape after the slaying of Brodda. 
Azaghal: Lord of the Dwarves of Belegost. 

Barad Eithel: 'Tower of the Well’, the fortress of the Noldor at Eithel Sirion. 

Baragund: Father of Morwen; cousin of Beren. 

Barakir: Father of Beren; brother of Bregolas. 

Bar-en-Danwedh: 'House of Ransom’, name given by Mim to his house. 
Bar-en-Nibin-noeg: 'House of the Petty-dwarves' on Arnon Rudh. 

Bar Erib: A stronghold of Dor-Cuarthol south of Amon Rudh. 

Battle of Unnumbered Tears: See Nirnaeth Arnoediad. 

Bauglir: 'The Constrainer', name given to Morgoth. 

Beleg: Elf of Doriath, a great archer; friend and companion of Turin. 

Called Cuthalion 'Strongbow'. 

Belegost: 'Great Fortress', one of the two cities of the Dwarves in the Blue Mountains. 
Belegund: Father of Rian; brother of Baragund. 

Beleriand*: Lands west of the Blue Mountains in the Elder Days. 

Belthronding: Beleg's bow. 



Beor: Leader of the first Men to enter Beleriand; progenitor of the House of Beor, one of 
the three Houses of the Edain. 

Beren: Man of the House of Beor, lover of Luthien, who cut a Silmaril from Morgoth's 
crown; called ’One-hand’ and Camlost ’Empty-handed’. 

Black King, The: Morgoth. 

Black Sword, The: Turin’s name in Nargothrond; also the sword itself. 

See Mormegil. 

Blue Mountains: The great mountain chain (called Ered Luin and Ered Lindon) between 
Beleriand and Eriador in the Elder Days. 

Bragollach: See Dagor Bragollach. 

Brandir: Ruler of the People of Haleth in Brethil when Turin came; son of Handir. 
Bregolas: Father of Baragund; Morwen's grandfather. 

Bregor: Father of Barahir and Bregolas. 

Brethil*: Forest between the rivers Teiglin and Sirion; Men of Brethil, the People of 
Haleth. 

Brithiach*: Ford over Sirion north of the Forest of Brethil. 

Brodda: An Easterling in Hithlum after the Nirnaeth Amoediad. 

Cabed-en-Aras: ’The Deer's Leap', a deep gorge of the river Teiglin where Turin slew 
Glaurung. 

Cabed Naeramarth: 'The Leap of Dreadful Doom', name given to Cabed-en-Aras after 
Nienor leapt from its cliffs. 

Celebros: Stream in Brethil falling down to Teiglin near the Crossings. 

Children of Iluvatar: Elves and Men. 

Cirdan: Called 'the Shipwright'; lord of the Falas; at the destruction of the Havens after 
the Nirnaeth Amoediad he escaped to the Isle of Balar in the south. 

Crissaegrim*: The mountain peaks south of Gondolin, where were the eyries of 
Thorondor. 



Crossings of Teiglin*: Fords where the old South Road to Nargothrond crossed the 
Teiglin. 

Ciithalion: ’Strongbow', name of Beleg. 

Daeron: Minstrel of Doriath. 

Dagor Bragollach: (also the Bragollach) The Battle of Sudden Flame, in which Morgoth 
ended the Siege of Angband. 

Dark Lord, The: Morgoth. 

Deer's Leap, The: See Cabed-en-Aras. 

Dimbar*: The land between the rivers Sirion and Mindeb. 

Dimrost: The Rainy Stair', the falls of Celebros in the Forest of Brethil, afterwards called 
Nen Girith. 

Dor Cuarthol: 'Land of Bow and Helm’, name given to the country defended by Turin and 
Beleg from their lair on Arnon Rudh. 

Doriath*: The kingdom of Thingol and Melian in the forests of Neldoreth and Region, 
ruled from Menegroth on the river Esgalduin. 

Dorlas: A man of consequence among the People of Haleth in the Forest of Brethil. 

Dor-lomin*: Region in the south of Hithlum given by King Fingollin as a fief to the 
House of Hador; the home of Hurin and Morwen. 

Dorthonion*: 'Land of Pines', great forested highlands on the northern borders of 
Beleriand, afterwards named Taur-nu-Fuin. 

Drengist*: Long firth of the sea piercing Ered Lomin, the Echoing Mountains. 

Easterlings: Tribes of Men who followed the Edain into Beleriand. 

Echad i Sedryn: (also the Echad) 'Camp of the Faithful', name given to Mim’s house on 
Arnon Rudh. 

Ecthelion: Elf-lord of Gondolin. 

Edain: (singular Adari) The Men of the Three Houses of the Elf-friends. 

Eithel Ivrin*: ’Ivrin's Well’, the source of the river Narog beneath Ered Wethrin. 



Eithel Sirion*: ’Sirion's Well', in the eastern face of Ered Wethrin; the fortress of the 
Noldor in that place, also called Barad Eithel. 

Eldalie: The Elven-folk, equivalent to Eldar. 

Eldar: The Elves of the Great Journey out of the East to Beleriand. 

Elder Children: The Elves. See Children of Iluvatar. 

Eledhwen: Name of Morwen, 'Elfsheen'. 

Encircling Mountains: The mountains encircling Tumladen, the plain of Gondolin. 
Enemy, The: Morgoth. 

Eol: Called 'the Dark Elf, a great smith who dwelt in Nan Elmoth; maker of the sword 
Anglachel; father of Maeglin. 

Ephel Brandir: 'The Fence of Brandir', the enclosed dwellings of the Men of Brethil upon 
Arnon Obel; also the Ephel. 

Ered Gorgoroth*: 'Mountains of Terror', the vast precipices in which Taur-nu-Fuin fell 
southward; also the Gorgoroth. 

Ered Wethrin: 'Shadowy Mountains', 'Mountains of Shadow', the great range fonning the 
boundary of Hithlum on the east and south. 

Esgalduin*: The river of Doriath, dividing the forests of Neldoreth and Region and 
flowing into Sirion. 

Exiles, The: The Noldor who rebelled against the Valar and returned to Middle-earth. 
Faelivrin: Name given to Finduilas by Gwindor. 

Fair Folk: The Eldar. 

Falas*: The coastlands of Beleriand in the West. 

Feanor: Eldest son of Finwe, the first leader of the Noldor; half-brother of Fingolfln; 
maker of the Silmarils; leader of the Noldor in their rebellion against the Valar, but slain 
in battle soon after his return to Middle-earth. See Sons of Feanor. 

Felagund: 'Hewer of caves’, name given to King Finrod after the establishment of 
Nargothrond and often used alone. 



Finarfin: Third son of Finwe, brother of Fingolfin and half-brother of Feanor; father of 
Finrod Felagund and Galadriel. Finarfin did not return to Middle-earth. 

Finduilas: Daughter of Orodreth, second King of Nargothrond. 

Fingolfin: Second son of Finwe, the first leader of the Noldor; High King of the Noldor, 
dwelling in Hithlum; father of Fingon and Turgon. 

Fingon: Eldest son of King Fingolfin, and High King of the Noldor after his death. 

Finrod: Son of Finarfin; founder and king of Nargothrond, brother of Orodreth and 
Galadriel; often called Felagund. 

Forweg: Man of Dor-lomin, captain of the outlaw band that Turin joined. 

Galdor the Tall: Son of Hador Goldenhead; father of Hurin and Huor; slain at Eithel 
Sirion. 

Gamil Zirak: Dwarf smith, teacher of Telchar of Nogrod. 

Gaurwaith: ’Wolf-men’, the outlaw band that Turin joined in the woodlands beyond the 
western borders of Doriath. 

Gelrnir (1): Elf of Nargothrond, brother of Gwindor. 

Gelrnir (2): Noldorin Elf who came with Anninas to Nargothrond to warn Orodreth of its 
peril. 

Gethron: One of Turin's companions on the journey to Doriath. 

Ginglith*: River flowing into the Narog above Nargothrond. 

Girdle of Melian: See Melian. 

Glaurung: 'Father of Dragons', the first of the Dragons of Morgoth. 

Glithui*: River flowing down from Ered Wethrin and joining Teiglin north of the inflow 
of Malduin. 

Gloredhel: Daughter of Hador, sister of Galdor Hurin's father; wife of Haldir of Brethil. 
Glorfindel: Elf-lord of Gondolin. 

Gondolin*: The hidden city of King Turgon. 

Gorgoroth: See Ered Gorgoroth. 



Gorthol: ’Dread Helm', name taken by Turin in the land of Dor Cuarthol. 

Gothmog: Lord of Balrogs; slayer of King Fingon. 

Great Mound, The: See Haudh-en-Nimaeth. 

Great Song, The: The Music of the Ainur, in which the World was begun. 

Grey-elves: The Sindar, name given to the Eldar who remained in Beleriand and did not 
cross the Great Sea into the West. 

Grithnir: One of Turin's companions on the journey to Doriath, where he died. 

Guarded Plain, The*: See Talath Dirnen. 

Guarded Realm, The: Doriath. 

Guilin: Elf of Nargothrond, father of Gwindor and Gelrnir. 

Gurthang: 'Iron of Death', Turin's name for the sword Anglachel after it was reforged in 
Nargothrond. 

Gwaeron: The 'windy month', March. 

Gwindor: Elf of Nargothrond, lover of Finduilas, companion of Turin. 

Hador Goldenhead: Elf- friend, lord of Dor-lomin, vassal of King Fingolfin; father of 
Galdor father of Hurin and Huor; slain at Eithel Sirion in the Dagor Bragollach. House of 
Hador, one of the Houses of the Edain. 

Haldir: Son of Halmir of Brethil; wedded Gloredhel daughter of Hador of Dor-lomin. 

Haleth: The Lady Haleth, who early became the leader of the Second House of the Edain, 
the Halethrim or People of Haleth, who dwelt in the Forest of Brethil. 

Halmir: Lord of the Men of Brethil. 

Handir of Brethil: Son of Haldir and Gloredhel; father of Brandir. 

Hareth: Daughter of Halmir of Brethil, wife of Galdor of Dor-lomin; mother of Hurin. 

Haudh-en-Elleth: The Mound of the Elf-maid’ near the Crossings of Teiglin, in which 
Finduilas was buried. 

Haudh-en-Nimaeth: 'The Mound of Tears' in the desert of Anfauglith. 



Hidden Kingdom, The: Doriath. 

Hidden Realm, The: Gondolin. 

High Faroth, The*: Highlands to the west of the river Narog above Nargothrond; also the 
Faroth. 

Hirilorn: A great beech-tree in the Forest of Neldoreth with three trunks. 

Hithlum*: 'Land of Mist', northern region bounded by the Mountains of Shadow. 

Hunthor: Man of Dor-lomin, companion of Turin in the attack on Glaurung. 

Huor: Hurin's brother; father of Tuor father of Earendil; slain in the Battle of 
Unnumbered Tears. 

Hurin: Lord of Dor-lomin, husband of Morwen and father of Turin and Nienor; called 
Thalion 'the Steadfast'. 

Ibun: One of the sons of Mim the Petty-dwarf. 

Iluvatar: 'The Father of All’. 

Indor: Man of Dor-lomin, father of Aerin. 

Ivrin*: Lake and falls beneath Ered Wethrin where the river Narog rose. 

Kh im: One of the sons of Mim the Petty-dwarf, slain by Androg's arrow. 

Labadal: Turin's name for Sador. 

Ladros*: Lands to the north-east of Dorthonion that were granted by the Noldorin kings 
to the Men of the House of Beor. 

Lady of Dor-lomin: Morwen. 

Lalaith: 'Laughter', name given to Urwen. 

Larnach: One of the Woodmen in the lands south of Teiglin. 

Lord of Waters: The Vala Ulmo. 

Lords of the West: The Valar. 


Lothlann: A great plain to the east of Dorthonion(Taur-nu-Fuin). 



Lothron: The fifth month. 


Luthien: Daughter of Thingol and Melian, who after the death of Beren chose to become 
mortal and to share his fate. Called Tinuviel 'daughter of twilight’, nightingale. 

Mablung: Elf of Doriath, chief captain of Thingol, friend of Turin; called 'the Hunter’. 

Maedhros: Eldest son of Feanor, with lands in the east beyond Dorthonion. 

Maeglin: Son of Eol ’the Dark Elf and Aredhel Turgon's sister; betrayer of Gondolin. 

Malduin*: A tributary of the Teiglin. 

Mandos: A Vala: the Judge, and Keeper of the Houses of the Dead in Valinor. 

Manwe: The chief of the Valar; called the Elder King. 

Melian: A Maia (see entry Ainur); the queen of King Thingol in Doriath, about which she 
set an invisible barrier of protection, the Girdle of Melian; mother of Luthien. 

Melkor: The Quenya name of Morgoth. 

Menegroth*: ’The Thousand Caves', the halls of Thingol and Melian on the river 
Esgalduin in Doriath. 

Menel: The heavens, region of the stars. 

Methed-en-glad: 'End of the wood', a stronghold of Dor Cuarthol at the edge of the forest 
south of Teiglin. 

Mim: The Petty-dwarf, dwelling on Arnon Rudh. 

Minas Tirith: 'Tower of Watch’, built by Finrod Felagund on Tol Sirion. 

Mindeb*: A tributary of Sirion, between Dimbar and the Forest of Neldoreth. 

Mi th rim* : The south-eastern region of Hithlum, separated from Dor-lomin by the 
Mountains of Mithrim. 

Morgoth: The great rebellious Vala, in his origin the mightiest of the Powers; called the 
Enemy, the Dark Lord, the Black King, Bauglir. 

Mormegil: 'Black Sword', name given to Turin in Nargothrond. 



Morwen: Daughter of Baragund of the House of Beor; wife of Hurin and mother of Turin 
and Nienor; called Eledhwen ’Elfsheen’ and Lady of Dor-lomin. 

Mountains of Shadow*: See Ered Wethrin. 

Nan Elmoth*: A forest in East Beleriand; dwelling-place of Eol. 

Nargothrond*: ’The great underground fortress on the river Narog', founded by Finrod 
Felagund, destroyed by Glaurung; also the realm of Nargothrond extending east and west 
of the river. 

Narog*: The chief river of West Beleriand, rising at Ivrin and flowing into Sirion near its 
mouths. People of Narog, the Elves of Nargothrond. 

Neithan: ’The Wronged’, name given to himself by Turin among the outlaws. 

Nellas: Elf of Doriath, friend of Turin in his boyhood. 

Nen Girith: ’Shuddering Water', name given to Dimrost, the falls of Celebros in Brethil. 

Nen Lalaith: Stream rising under Amon Darthir, a peak in Ered Wethrin, and flowing past 
Hurin's house in Dor-lomin. 

Nenning*: River in West Beleriand, reaching the Sea at the Haven of Eglarest. 

Nevrast*: Region west of Dor-lomin, beyond the Echoing Mountains* (Ered Lomin). 
Nibin-noeg, Nibin-nogrim: Petty-dwarves. 

Nienor: 'Mourning', daughter of Hurin and Morwen, and sister of Turin; see Niniel. 

Nimbrethil*: Birchwoods in Arvernien; named in Bilbo's song in Rivendell. 

Niniel: 'Maid of Tears', name that Turin gave to Nienor in Brethil. 

Nimaetb Arnoediad: The Battle of TJnnumbered Tears', also the Nimaeth. 

Nogrod: One of the two cities of the Dwarves in the Blue Mountains. 

Noldor: The second host of the Eldar on the Great Journey out of the East to Beleriand; 
the 'Deep Elves', 'the Loremasters'. 

Nuath, Woods of*: Woods extending westward from the upper waters of the Narog. 
Orleg: A man of Turin's outlaw band. 



Orodreth: King of Nargothrond after the death of his brother Finrod Felagund; father of 
Finduilas. 

Osse: A Maia (see entry Ainur); vassal of Ulmo Lord of Waters. 

Petty-dwarves: A race of Dwarves in Middle-earth of whom Mim and his two sons were 
the last survivors. 

Powers, The: The Valar. 

Ragnir: A blind servant in Hurin's house in Dor-lomin. 

Region*: The southern forest of Doriath. 

Rian; Cousin of Morwen; wife of Huor Hurin's brother; mother of Tuor. 

Rivil*: Stream falling from Dorthonion to join Sirion in the Fen of Serech. 

Sador: Woodwright, serving-man of Hurin's in Dor-lomin and friend of Turin in his 
childhood, by whom he was called Labadal. 

Saeros: Elf of Doriath, a counsellor of Thingol, hostile to Turin. 

Sauron's Isle: Tol Sirion. 

Serech*: The great fen north of the Pass of Sirion, where the river Rivil flowed in from 
Dorthonion. 

Shadowy Mountains: See Ered Wethrin. 

Sharbhund: Dwarvish name of Arnon Rudh. 

Sindarin: Grey-elven, the Elvish tongue of Beleriand. See Grey-elves. 

Sirion*: The great river of Beleriand, rising at Eithel Sirion. 

Sons of Feanor: See Feanor. The seven sons held lands in East Beleriand. 

South Road*: The ancient road from Tol Sirion to Nargothrond by the Crossings of 
Teiglin. 

Spyhill, The: See Amon Ethir. 

Strawheads: Name given to the People of Hador by the Easterlings in Hithlum. 
Strongbow: Name of Beleg; see Cuthalion. 



Talath Dimen*: ’The Guarded Plain', north of Nargothrond. 

Taur-nu-Fuin*: 'Forest under Night' , later name of Dorthonion. 

Teiglin* A tributary of Sirion rising in the Shadowy Mountains and flowing through the 
Forest of Brethil. See Crossings of Teiglin. 

Telchar: Renowned smith of Nogrod. 

Telperion: The White Tree, elder of the Two Trees that gave light to Valinor. 

Thangorodrim: 'Mountains of Tyranny', reared by Morgoth over Angband. 

Thingol: 'Greycloak', King of Doriath, overlord of the Grey-elves (Sindar); wedded to 
Melian the Maia; father of Luthicn. 

Thorondor: 'King of Eagles' (cf. The Return of the King VI.4: 'old Thorondor, who built 
his eyries in the inaccessible peaks of the Encircling Mountains when Middle-earth was 
young’). 

Three Houses (of the Edain): The Houses of Beor, Haleth, and Hador. 

Thurin: 'The Secret', name given to Turin by Knduilas. 

Tol Sirion*: Island in the river in the Pass of Sirion on which Finrod built the tower of 
Minas Tirith; afterwards taken by Sauron. 

Tumhalad*: Valley in West Beleriand between the rivers Ginglith and Narog where the 
host of Nargothrond was defeated. 

Tumladen: The hidden vale in the Encircling Mountains where the city of Gondolin 
stood. 

Tuor: Son of Huor and Rian; cousin of Turin and father of Earendil. 

Turambar: 'Master of Doom', name taken by Turin among the Men of Brethil. 

Turgon: Second son of King Fingolfin and brother of Fingon; founder and king of 
Gondolin. 

Turin: Son of Hurin and Morwen, chief subject of the lay named Narn i chin Hurin. For 
his other names see Neithan, Gorthol, Agarwaen, Thurin, Adanedhel, Monnegil (Black 
Sword), Wild Man of the Woods, Turambar. 


Twilit Meres*: Region of marshes and pools where the Aros flowed into Sirion. 



Uldor the Accursed: A leader of the Easterlings who was slain in the Battle of 
Unnumbered Tears. 

Ulmo: One of the great Valar, 'Lord of Waters'. 

Ulrad: A member of the outlaw band that Turin joined. 

Umarth: 'Ill-fate', a fictitious name for his father given out by Turin in Nargothrond. 
Unnumbered Tears: The battle of Nirnaeth Amoediad. 

Urwen: Daughter of Hurin and Morwen who died in childhood; called Lalaith 'Laughter'. 

Valar: 'The Powers', those great spirits that entered the World at the beginning of time. 

Valinor: The land of the Valar in the West, beyond the Great Sea. 

Varda: The greatest of the Queens of the Valar, the spouse of Manwe. 

Wildman of the Woods: Name taken by Turin when he first came among the Men of 
Brethil. 

Wolf-men: See Gaurwaith. 

Woodmen: Dwellers in the woods south of Teiglin, plundered by the Gaurwaith. 

Year of Lamentation: The year of the Nirnaeth Arnoediad. 

Younger Children: Men. See Children of Iluvatar. 



NOTE ON THE MAP 


This map is closely based on that in the published Silmarillion, which was itself derived 
from the map that my father made in the 1930s, and which he never replaced, but used 
for all his subsequent work. The formalised, and obviously very selective, representations 
of mountains, hills and forests are imitated from his style. 

In this redrawing I have introduced certain differences, intended to simplify it and to 
make it more expressly applicable to the tale of The Children of Hurin. Thus it does not 
extend eastward to include Ossiriand and the Blue Mountains, and certain geographical 
features are omitted; while (with a few exceptions) only names that actually occur in the 
text of the tale are marked. 

J. R. R. 


TOLKIEN 






THE 


ARI 


EDITED BY CHRISTOPHER TOLKIEN 








Illustrated by Ted NaSMITH 











J.R.R. TOLKIEN 


QUENTA SILMARILLION 
(The History of the Silmarils) 

together with 

AINULINDALE 
(The Music of the Ainur) 

and 

VALAQUENTA 
(Account of the Valar) 

To which is appended 

AKALLABETH 
(The Downfall of Numenor) 

and 


OF THE RINGS OF POWER AND THE THIRD AGE 



n vit \nb hnCn ccf dm noo rf> mj2£ i.nb 

v \n oai? ft *6 Xto hrf p Is 


J.R.R. TOLKIEN 


The Silmarillion 


edited by 

CHRISTOPHER TOLKIEN 


Illustrated by 
TED NASMITH 

HarperCollins e-books 


JJ dcf o pmpp? |7) pot5n?h-£ }» makrorf p5 b> X'6pf]' Js 

|a p£n p fz> hrfjv ccf xicf b>£ pz^rpfl. p hoAr? rop 












Contents 


J.R.R. TOLKIEN 

TITLE PAGE 

FOREWORD 

PREFACE TO THE SECOND EDITION 

FROM A LETTER BY J.R.R. TOLKIEN TO MILTON WALDMAN. 1951 

AINUL INDALE 

VALAOUENTA 

OUENTA SILMARILLION 

CHAPTER 1: OF THE BEGINNING OF DAYS 

CHAPTER 2: OF AULE AND YAVANNA 

CHAPTER 3: OF THE COMING OF THE ELVES AND THE CAPTIVITY OF 

MELKOR 

CHAPTER 4: OF THINGOL AND MELIAN 

CHAPTER 5: OF ELDAMAR AND THE PRINCES OF THE EL DAL IE 

CHAPTER 6: OF FEANOR AND THE UNCHAINING OF MELKOR 

CHAPTER 7: OF THE SILMARILS AND THE UNREST OF THE NOLDOR 

CHAPTER 8: OF THE DARKENING OF VALINOR 

CHAPTER 9: OF THE FLIGHT OF THE NOLDOR 

CHAPTER 10: OF THE SINDAR 

CHAPTER 11: OF THE SUN AND MOON AND THE HIDING OF VALINOR 

CHAPTER 12: OF MEN 

CHAPTER 13: OF THE RETURN OF THE NOLDOR 

CHAPTER 14: OF BELERIAND AND ITS REALMS 

CHAPTER 15: OF THE NOLDOR IN BELERIAND 

CHAPTER 16: OF MAEGLIN 

CHAPTER 17: OF THE COMING OF MEN INTO THE WEST 

CHAPTER 18: OF THE RUIN OF BELERIAND AND THE FALL OF 

FINGOLFIN 

CHAPTER 19: OF BEREN AND LUTHIEN 

CHAPTER 20: OF THE FIFTH BATTLE: NIRNAETH ARNOEDIAD 

CHAPTER 21: OF TURIN TURAMBAR 

































CHAPTER 22: OF THE RUIN OF DORIATH 

CHAPTER 23: OF TUOR AND THE FALL OF GONDOLIN 

CHAPTER 24: OF THE VOYAGE OF EARENDIL AND THE WAR OF 

WRATH 

AKALLABETH 

OF THE RINGS OF POWER AND THE THIRD AGE 

NOTE ON PRONUNCIATION 

INDEX OF NAMES 

APPENDIX 

MAPS 

WORKS BY J.R.R. TOLKIEN 

COPYRIGHT PAGE 
ABOUT THE PUBLISHER 















FOREWORD 


The Silmarillion, now published four years after the death of its author, is an 
account of the Elder Days, or the First Age of the World. In The Lord of the 
Rings were narrated the great events at the end of the Third Age; but the tales of 
The Silmarillion are legends deriving from a much deeper past, when Morgoth, 
the first Dark Lord, dwelt in Middle-earth, and the High Elves made war upon 
him for the recovery of the Silmarils. 

Not only, however, does The Silmarillion relate the events of a far earlier time 
than those of The Lord of the Rings; it is also, in ah the essentials of its 
conception, far the earlier work. Indeed, although it was not then called The 
Silmarillion, it was already in being half a century ago; and in battered 
notebooks extending back to 1917 can still be read the earliest versions, often 
hastily pencilled, of the central stories of the mythology. But it was never 
published (though some indication of its content could be gleaned from The Lord 
of the Rings), and throughout my father’s long life he never abandoned it, nor 
ceased even in his last years to work on it. In ah that time The Silmarillion, 
considered simply as a large narrative structure, underwent relatively little 
radical change; it became long ago a fixed tradition, and background to later 
writings. But it was far indeed from being a fixed text, and did not remain 
unchanged even in certain fundamental ideas concerning the nature of the world 
it portrays; while the same legends came to be retold in longer and shorter forms, 
and in different styles. As the years passed the changes and variants, both in 
detail and in larger perspectives, became so complex, so pervasive, and so many¬ 
layered that a final and definitive version seemed unattainable. Moreover the old 
legends (‘old’ now not only in their derivation from the remote First Age, but 
also in terms of my father’s life) became the vehicle and depository of his 
profoundest reflections. In his later writing mythology and poetry sank down 
behind his theological and philosophical preoccupations: from which arose 
incompatibilities of tone. 

On my father’s death it fell to me to try to bring the work into publishable 
form. It became clear to me that to attempt to present, within the covers of a 
single book, the diversity of the materials - to show The Silmarillion as in truth a 
continuing and evolving creation extending over more than half a century - 
would in fact lead only to confusion and the submerging of what is essential. I 



set myself therefore to work out a single text, selecting and arranging in such a 
way as seemed to me to produce the most coherent and internally self-consistent 
narrative. In this work the concluding chapters (from the death of Turin 
Turambar) introduced peculiar difficulties, in that they had remained unchanged 
for many years, and were in some respects in serious disharmony with more 
developed conceptions in other parts of the book. 

A complete consistency (either within the compass of The Silmarillion itself 
or between The Silmarillion and other published writings of my father’s) is not 
to be looked for, and could only be achieved, if at all, at heavy and needless cost. 
Moreover, my father come to conceive The Silmarillion as a compilation, a 
compendious narrative, made long afterwards from sources of great diversity 
(poems, and annals, and oral tales) that had survived in agelong tradition; and 
this conception has indeed its parallel in the actual history of the book, for a 
great deal of earlier prose and poetry does underlie it, and it is to some extent a 
compendium in fact and not only in theory. To this may be ascribed the varying 
speed of the narrative and fullness of detail in different parts, the contrast (for 
example) of the precise recollections of place and motive in the legend of Turin 
Turambar beside the high and remote account of the end of the First Age, when 
Thangorodrim was broken and Morgoth overthrown; and also some differences 
of tone and portrayal, some obscurities, and, here and there, some lack of 
cohesion. In the case of the Valaquenta, for instance, we have to assume that 
while it contains much that must go back to the earliest days of the Eldar in 
Valinor, it was remodelled in later times; and thus explain its continual shifting 
of tense and viewpoint, so that the divine powers seem now present and active in 
the world, now remote, a vanished order known only to memory. 

The book, though entitled as it must be The Silmarillion, contains not only the 
Quenta Silmarillion, or Silmarillion proper, but also four other short works. The 
Ainulindale and Valaquenta, which are given at the beginning, are indeed closely 
associated with The Silmarillion; but the Akallabeth and Of the Rings of Power, 
which appear at the end, are (it must be emphasised) wholly separate and 
independent. They are included according to my father’s explicit intention, and 
by their inclusion the entire history is set forth from the Music of the Ainur in 
which the world began to the passing of the Ringbearers from the Havens of 
Mithlond at the end of the Third Age. 

The number of names that occur in the book is very large, and I have provided 
a full index; but the number of persons (Elves and Men) who play an important 
part in the narrative of the First Age is very much smaller, and all of these will 
be found in the genealogical tables. In addition I have provided a table setting 
out the rather complex naming of the different Elvish peoples; a note on the 



pronunciation of Elvish names, and a list of some of the chief elements found in 
these names; and a map. It may be noted that the great mountain range in the 
east, Ered Luin or Ered Lindon, the Blue Mountains, appears in the extreme west 
of the map in The Lord of the Rings. In the body of the book there is a smaller 
map: the intention of this is to make clear at a glance where lay the kingdoms of 
the Elves after the return of the Noldor to Middle-earth. I have not burdened the 
book further with any sort of commentary or annotation. 

In the difficult and doubtful task of preparing the text of the book I was very 
greatly assisted by Guy Kay, who worked with me in 1974-1975. 

Christopher Tolkien 
1977 



PRFFACF TO THF. SECOND F.DTTTON 


Probably towards the end of 1951, when The Lord of the Rings was completed 
but difficulties lay in the way of its publication, my father wrote a very long 
letter to his friend Milton Waldman, at that time an editor at the publishing house 
of Collins. The context and occasion of this letter lay in the painful differences 
that arose over my father’s insistence that The Silmarillion and The Lord of the 
Rings should be published in ‘conjunction or in connexion’ ‘as one long Saga of 
the Jewels and the Rings’. There is however no need to enter into this matter 
here. The letter that he wrote with a view to justifying and explaining his 
contention emerged as a brilliant exposition of his conception of the earlier Ages 
(the latter part of the letter, as he himself said, was no more than ‘a long and yet 
bald resume’ of the narrative of The Lord of the Rings), and it is for this reason 
that I believe that it merits inclusion within the covers of The Silmarillion, as is 
done in this edition. 

The original letter is lost, but Milton Waldman had a typescript made of it, and 
sent a copy to my father: it was from this copy that the letter was printed (in 
part) in The Letters of J.R.R. Tolkien (1981), no.131. The text given here is that 
in Letters, pp. 143-157, with minor corrections and the omission of some of the 
footnotes. There were many errors in the typescript, especially in names; these 
were very largely corrected by my father, but he did not observe the sentence on 
p.xviii: ‘There was nothing wrong essentially in their lingering against counsel, 
still sadly with the mortal lands of their old heroic deeds.’ Here the typist 
certainly omitted words in the manuscript, and perhaps misread those given as 
well. 


I have removed a number of errors in the text and index which until now have 
escaped correction in the hardback printings (only) of The Silmarillion. Chief 
among these are those that concern the numbering in sequence of certain of the 
rulers of Numenor (for these errors and an explanation of how they arose see 
Unfinished Tales (1980), p.226, note 11, and The Peoples of Middle-earth 
(1996), p.154, §31). 


Christopher Tolkien 



1999 



FROM A T.F.TTF.R BY T.R.R. TOT.KTF.N TO 

MIT TON WAT,DM AN. 1951 


My dear Milton, 

You asked for a brief sketch of my stuff that is connected with my imaginary 
world. It is difficult to say anything without saying too much: the attempt to say 
a few words opens a floodgate of excitement, the egoist and artist at once desires 
to say how the stuff has grown, what it is like, and what (he thinks) he means or 
is trying to represent by it all. I shall inflict some of this on you; but I will 
append a mere resume of its contents: which is (may be) all that you want or will 
have use or time for. 

In order of time, growth and composition, this stuff began with me - though I 
do not suppose that that is of much interest to anyone but myself. I mean, I do 
not remember a time when I was not building it. Many children make up, or 
begin to make up, imaginary languages. I have been at it since I could write. But 
I have never stopped, and of course, as a professional philologist (especially 
interested in linguistic aesthetics), I have changed in taste, improved in theory, 
and probably in craft. Behind my stories is now a nexus of languages (mostly 
only structurally sketched). But to those creatures which in English I call 
misleadingly Elves are assigned two related languages more nearly completed, 
whose history is written, and whose forms (representing two different sides of 
my own linguistic taste) are deduced scientifically from a common origin. Out of 
these languages are made nearly all the names that appear in my legends. This 
gives a certain character (a cohesion, a consistency of linguistic style, and an 
illusion of historicity) to the nomenclature, or so I believe, that is markedly 
lacking in other comparable things. Not ah will feel this as important as I do, 
since I am cursed by acute sensibility in such matters. 

But an equally basic passion of mine ab initio was for myth (not allegory!) 
and for fairy-story, and above ah for heroic legend on the brink of fairy-tale and 
history, of which there is far too little in the world (accessible to me) for my 
appetite. I was an undergraduate before thought and experience revealed to me 
that these were not divergent interests - opposite poles of science and romance - 
but integrally related. I am not ‘learned’* in the matters of myth and fairy-story, 
however, for in such things (as far as known to me) I have always been seeking 




material, things of a certain tone and air, and not simple knowledge. Also - and 
here I hope I shall not sound absurd - I was from early days grieved by the 
poverty of my own beloved country: it had no stories of its own (bound up with 
its tongue and soil), not of the quality that I sought, and found (as an ingredient) 
in legends of other lands. There was Greek, and Celtic, and Romance, Germanic, 
Scandinavian, and Finnish (which greatly affected me); but nothing English, 
save impoverished chap-book stuff. Of course there was and is all the Arthurian 
world, but powerful as it is, it is imperfectly naturalized, associated with the soil 
of Britain but not with English; and does not replace what I felt to be missing. 
For one thing its 'faerie’ is too lavish, and fantastical, incoherent and repetitive. 
For another and more important thing: it is involved in, and explicitly contains 
the Christian religion. 

For reasons which I will not elaborate, that seems to me fatal. Myth and fairy- 
story must, as all art, reflect and contain in solution elements of moral and 
religious truth (or error), but not explicit, not in the known form of the primary 
‘real’ world. (I am speaking, of course, of our present situation, not of ancient 
pagan, pre-Christian days. And I will not repeat what I tried to say in my essay, 
which you read.) 

Do not laugh! But once upon a time (my crest has long since fallen) I had a 
mind to make a body of more or less connected legend, ranging from the large 
and cosmogonic, to the level of romantic fairy-story - the larger founded on the 
lesser in contact with the earth, the lesser drawing splendour from the vast 
backcloths - which I could dedicate simply to: to England; to my country. It 
should possess the tone and quality that I desired, somewhat cool and clear, be 
redolent of our ‘air’ (the clime and soil of the North West, meaning Britain and 
the hither parts of Europe: not Italy or the Aegean, still less the East), and, while 
possessing (if I could achieve it) the fair elusive beauty that some call Celtic 
(though it is rarely found in genuine ancient Celtic things), it should be ‘high’, 
purged of the gross, and fit for the more adult mind of a land long now steeped 
in poetry. I would draw some of the great tales in fullness, and leave many only 
placed in the scheme, and sketched. The cycles should be linked to a majestic 
whole, and yet leave scope for other minds and hands, wielding paint and music 
and drama. Absurd. 

Of course, such an overweening purpose did not develop all at once. The mere 
stories were the thing. They arose in my mind as ‘given’ things, and as they 
came, separately, so too the links grew. An absorbing, though continually 
interrupted labour (especially since, even apart from the necessities of life, the 
mind would wing to the other pole and spend itself on the linguistics): yet 
always I had the sense of recording what was already ‘there’, somewhere: not of 



‘inventing’. 

Of course, I made up and even wrote lots of other things (especially for my 
children). Some escaped from the grasp of this branching acquisitive theme, 
being ultimately and radically unrelated: Leaf by Niggle and Farmer Giles, for 
instance, the only two that have been printed. The Hobbit, which has much more 
essential life in it, was quite independently conceived: I did not know as I began 
it that it belonged. But it proved to be the discovery of the completion of the 
whole, its mode of descent to earth, and merging into ‘history’. As the high 
Legends of the beginnings are supposed to look at things through Elvish minds, 
so the middle tale of the Hobbit takes a virtually human point of view - and the 
last tale blends them. 

I dislike Allegory - the conscious and intentional allegory - yet any attempt to 
explain the purport of myth or fairytale must use allegorical language. (And, of 
course, the more ‘life’ a story has the more readily will it be susceptible of 
allegorical interpretations: while the better a deliberate allegory is made the more 
nearly will it be acceptable just as a story.) Anyway all this stuff* is mainly 
concerned with Fall, Mortality, and the Machine. With Fall inevitably, and that 
motive occurs in several modes. With Mortality, especially as it affects art and 
the creative (or as I should say, sub-creative) desire which seems to have no 
biological function, and to be apart from the satisfactions of plain ordinary 
biological life, with which, in our world, it is indeed usually at strife. This desire 
is at once wedded to a passionate love of the real primary world, and hence filled 
with the sense of mortality, and yet unsatisfied by it. It has various opportunities 
of ‘Fall’. It may become possessive, clinging to the things made as its own, the 
sub-creator wishes to be the Lord and God of his private creation. He will rebel 
against the laws of the Creator - especially against mortality. Both of these 
(alone or together) will lead to the desire for Power, for making the will more 
quickly effective, - and so to the Machine (or Magic). By the last I intend all use 
of external plans or devices (apparatus) instead of developments of the inherent 
inner powers or talents - or even the use of these talents with the corrupted 
motive of dominating: bulldozing the real world, or coercing other wills. The 
Machine is our more obvious modern form though more closely related to Magic 
than is usually recognised. 

I have not used ‘magic’ consistently, and indeed the Elven-queen Galadriel is 
obliged to remonstrate with the Hobbits on their confused use of the word both 
for the devices and operations of the Enemy, and for those of the Elves. I have 
not, because there is not a word for the latter (since all human stories have 
suffered the same confusion). But the Elves are there (in my tales) to 
demonstrate the difference. Their ‘magic’ is Art, delivered from many of its 


human limitations: more effortless, more quick, more complete (product, and 
vision in unflawed correspondence). And its object is Art not Power, sub¬ 
creation not domination and tyrannous reforming of Creation. The ‘Elves’ are 
‘immortal’, at least as far as this world goes: and hence are concerned rather 
with the griefs and burdens of deathlessness in time and change, than with death. 
The Enemy in successive forms is always ‘naturally’ concerned with sheer 
Domination, and so the Lord of magic and machines; but the problem: that this 
frightful evil can and does arise from an apparently good root, the desire to 
benefit the world and others* - speedily and according to the benefactors own 
plans - is a recurrent motive. 


The cycles begin with a cosmogonical myth: the Music of the Amur. God and 
the Valar (or powers: Englished as gods) are revealed. These latter are as we 
should say angelic powers, whose function is to exercise delegated authority in 
their spheres (of rule and government, not creation, making or re-making). They 
are ‘divine’, that is, were originally ‘outside’ and existed ‘before’ the making of 
the world. Their power and wisdom is derived from their Knowledge of the 
cosmogonical drama, which they perceived first as a drama (that is as in a 
fashion we perceive a story composed by someone else), and later as a ‘reality’. 
On the side of mere narrative device, this is, of course, meant to provide beings 
of the same order of beauty, power, and majesty as the ‘gods’ of higher 
mythology, which can yet be accepted - well, shall we say baldly, by a mind that 
believes in the Blessed Trinity. 

It moves then swiftly to the History of the Elves, or the Silmarillion proper; to 
the world as we perceive it, but of course transfigured in a still half-mythical 
mode: that is it deals with rational incarnate creatures of more or less 
comparable stature with our own. The Knowledge of the Creation Drama was 
incomplete: incomplete in each individual ‘god’, and incomplete if all the 
knowledge of the pantheon were pooled. For (partly to redress the evil of the 
rebel Melkor, partly for the completion of all in an ultimate finesse of detail) the 
Creator had not revealed all. The making, and nature, of the Children of God, 
were the two chief secrets. All that the gods knew was that they would come, at 
appointed times. The Children of God are thus primevally related and akin, and 
primevally different. Since also they are something wholly ‘other’ to the gods, in 
the making of which the gods played no part, they are the object of the special 
desire and love of the gods. These are the First-born, the Elves; and the 
Followers Men. The doom of the Elves is to be immortal, to love the beauty of 
the world, to bring it to full flower with their gifts of delicacy and perfection, to 


last while it lasts, never leaving it even when ‘slain’, but returning - and yet, 
when the Followers come, to teach them, and make way for them, to ‘fade’ as 
the Followers grow and absorb the life from which both proceed. The Doom (or 
the Gift) of Men is mortality, freedom from the circles of the world. Since the 
point of view of the whole cycle is the Elvish, mortality is not explained 
mythically: it is a mystery of God of which no more is known than that ‘what 
God has purposed for Men is hidden’: a grief and an envy to the immortal Elves. 

As I say, the legendary Silmarillion is peculiar, and differs from all similar 
things that I know in not being anthropocentric. Its centre of view and interest is 
not Men but ‘Elves’. Men come in inevitably: after all the author is a man, and if 
he has an audience they will be Men and Men must come in to our tales, as such, 
and not merely transfigured or partially represented as Elves, Dwarfs, Hobbits, 
etc. But they remain peripheral - late comers, and however growingly important, 
not principals. 

In the cosmogony there is a fall: a fall of Angels we should say. Though quite 
different in form, of course, to that of Christian myth. These tales are ‘new’, they 
are not directly derived from other myths and legends, but they must inevitably 
contain a large measure of ancient wide-spread motives or elements. After all, I 
believe that legends and myths are largely made of ‘truth’, and indeed present 
aspects of it that can only be received in this mode; and long ago certain truths 
and modes of this kind were discovered and must always reappear. There cannot 
be any ‘story’ without a fall - all stories are ultimately about the fall - at least 
not for human minds as we know them and have them. 

So, proceeding, the Elves have a fall, before their ‘history’ can become storial. 
(The first fall of Man, for reasons explained, nowhere appears - Men do not 
come on the stage until all that is long past, and there is only a rumour that for a 
while they fell under the domination of the Enemy and that some repented.) The 
main body of the tale, the Silmarillion proper, is about the fall of the most gifted 
kindred of the Elves, their exile from Valinor (a kind of Paradise, the home of 
the Gods) in the furthest West, their re-entry into Middle-earth, the land of their 
birth but long under the rule of the Enemy, and their strife with him, the power 
of Evil still visibly incarnate. It receives its name because the events are all 
threaded upon the fate and significance of the Silmarilli (‘radiance of pure light’) 
or Primeval Jewels. By the making of gems the sub-creative function of the 
Elves is chiefly symbolized, but the Silmarilli were more than just beautiful 
things as such. There was Light. There was the Light of Valinor made visible in 
the Two Trees of Silver and Gold.* These were slain by the Enemy out of 
malice, and Valinor was darkened, though from them, ere they died utterly, were 
derived the lights of Sun and Moon. (A marked difference here between these 


legends and most others is that the Sun is not a divine symbol, but a second-best 
thing, and the ‘light of the Sun’ (the world under the sun) become terms for a 
fallen world, and a dislocated imperfect vision). 

But the chief artificer of the Elves (Feanor) had imprisoned the Light of 
Valinor in the three supreme jewels, the Silmarilli, before the Trees were sullied 
or slain. This Light thus lived thereafter only in these gems. The fall of the Elves 
comes about through the possessive attitude of Feanor and his seven sons to 
these gems. They are captured by the Enemy, set in his Iron Crown, and guarded 
in his impenetrable stronghold. The sons of Feanor take a terrible and 
blasphemous oath of enmity and vengeance against all or any, even of the gods, 
who dares to claim any part or right in the Silmarilli. They pervert the greater 
part of their kindred, who rebel against the gods, and depart from paradise, and 
go to make hopeless war upon the Enemy. The first fruit of their fall is war in 
Paradise, the slaying of Elves by Elves, and this and their evil oath dogs all their 
later heroism, generating treacheries and undoing all victories. The Silmarillion 
is the history of the War of the Exiled Elves against the Enemy, which all takes 
place in the North-west of the world (Middle-earth). Several tales of victory and 
tragedy are caught up in it; but it ends with catastrophe, and the passing of the 
Ancient World, the world of the long First Age. The jewels are recovered (by the 
final intervention of the gods) only to be lost for ever to the Elves, one in the sea, 
one in the deeps of earth, and one as a star of heaven. This legendarium ends 
with a vision of the end of the world, its breaking and remaking, and the 
recovery of the Silmarilli and the ‘light before the Sun’ - after a final battle 
which owes, I suppose, more to the Norse vision of Ragnarok than to anything 
else, though it is not much like it. 

As the stories become less mythical, and more like stories and romances, Men 
are interwoven. For the most part these are ‘good Men’ - families and their 
chiefs who rejecting the service of Evil, and hearing rumours of the Gods of the 
West and the High Elves, flee westward and come into contact with the Exiled 
Elves in the midst of their war. The Men who appear are mainly those of the 
Three Houses of the Fathers of Men, whose chieftains become allies of the 
Elflords. The contact of Men and Elves already fore-shadows the history of the 
later Ages, and a recurrent theme is the idea that in Men (as they now are) there 
is a strand of ‘blood’ and inheritance, derived from the Elves, and that the art and 
poetry of Men is largely dependent on it, or modified by it.* There are thus two 
marriages of mortal and elf - both later coalescing in the kindred of Earendil, 
represented by Elrond the Half-elven who appears in all the stories, even The 
Hobbit. The chief of the stories of The Silmarillion, and the one most fully 
treated is the Story of Beren and Luthien the Elfmaiden. Here we meet, among 


other things, the first example of the motive (to become dominant in Hobbits) 
that the great policies of world history, ‘the wheels of the world’, are often 
turned not by the Lords and Governors, even gods, but by the seemingly 
unknown and weak - owing to the secret life in creation, and the part 
unknowable to all wisdom but One, that resides in the intrusions of the Children 
of God into the Drama. It is Beren the outlawed mortal who succeeds (with the 
help of Luthien, a mere maiden even if an elf of royalty) where all the armies 
and warriors have failed: he penetrates the stronghold of the Enemy and wrests 
one of the Silmarilli from the Iron Crown. Thus he wins the hand of Luthien and 
the first marriage of mortal and immortal is achieved. 

As such the story is (I think a beautiful and powerful) heroic-fairy-romance, 
receivable in itself with only a very general vague knowledge of the background. 
But it is also a fundamental link in the cycle, deprived of its full significance out 
of its place therein. For the capture of the Silmaril, a supreme victory, leads to 
disaster. The oath of the sons of Feanor becomes operative, and lust for the 
Silmaril brings all the kingdoms of the Elves to ruin. 

There are other stories almost equally full in treatment, and equally 
independent and yet linked to the general history. There is the Children ofHurin, 
the tragic tale of Turin Turambar and his sister Niniel - of which Turin is the 
hero: a figure that might be said (by people who like that sort of thing, though it 
is not very useful) to be derived from elements in Sigurd the Volsung, Oedipus, 
and the Finnish Kullervo. There is the Fall of Gondolin : the chief Elvish 
stronghold. And the tale, or tales, of Earendil the Wanderer. He is important as 
the person who brings the Silmarillion to its end, and as providing in his 
offspring the main links to and persons in the tales of later Ages. His function, as 
a representative of both Kindreds, Elves and Men, is to find a sea-passage back 
to the Land of the Gods, and as ambassador persuade them to take thought again 
for the Exiles, to pity them, and rescue them from the Enemy. His wife Elwing 
descends from Luthien and still possesses the Silmaril. But the curse still works, 
and EarendiTs home is destroyed by the sons of Feanor. But this provides the 
solution: Elwing casting herself into the Sea to save the Jewel comes to Earendil, 
and with the power of the great Gem they pass at last to Valinor, and accomplish 
their errand - at the cost of never being allowed to return or dwell again with 
Elves or Men. The gods then move again, and great power comes out of the 
West, and the Stronghold of the Enemy is destroyed; and he himself [is] thrust 
out of the World into the Void, never to reappear there in incarnate form again. 
The remaining two Silmarils are regained from the Iron Crown - only to be lost. 
The last two sons of Feanor, compelled by their oath, steal them, and are 
destroyed by them, casting themselves into the sea, and the pits of the earth. The 



ship of Earendil adorned with the last Silmaril is set in heaven as the brightest 
star. So ends The Silmarillion and the tales of the First Age. 


The next cycle deals (or would deal) with the Second Age. But it is on Earth a 
dark age, and not very much of its history is (or need be) told. In the great battles 
against the First Enemy the lands were broken and ruined, and the West of 
Middle-earth became desolate. We learn that the Exiled Elves were, if not 
commanded, at least sternly counselled to return into the West, and there be at 
peace. They were not to dwell permanently in Valinor again, but in the Lonely 
Isle of Eressea within sight of the Blessed Realm. The Men of the Three Houses 
were rewarded for their valour and faithful alliance, by being allowed to dwell 
‘westernmost of all mortals’, in the great ‘Atlantis’ isle of Numenore. The doom 
or gift of God, of mortality, the gods of course cannot abrogate, but the 
Numenoreans have a great span of life. They set sail and leave Middle-earth, and 
establish a great kingdom of mariners just within furthest sight of Eressea (but 
not of Valinor). Most of the High Elves depart also back into the West. Not all. 
Some men akin to the Numenoreans remain in the land not far from the shores of 
the Sea. Some of the Exiles will not return, or delay their return (for the way 
west is ever open to the immortals and in the Grey Havens ships are ever ready 
to sail away for ever). Also the Ores (goblins) and other monsters bred by the 
First Enemy are not wholly destroyed. And there is Sauron. In the Silmarillion 
and Tales of the First Age Sauron was a being of Valinor perverted to the service 
of the Enemy and becoming his chief captain and servant. He repents in fear 
when the First Enemy is utterly defeated, but in the end does not do as was 
commanded, return to the judgement of the gods. He lingers in Middle-earth. 
Very slowly, beginning with fair motives: the reorganising and rehabilitation of 
the ruin of Middle-earth, ‘neglected by the gods’, he becomes a re-incarnation of 
Evil, and a thing lusting for Complete Power - and so consumed ever more 
fiercely with hate (especially of gods and Elves). All through the twilight of the 
Second Age the Shadow is growing in the East of Middle-earth, spreading its 
sway more and more over Men - who multiply as the Elves begin to fade. The 
three main themes are thus The Delaying Elves that lingered in Middle-earth; 
Sauron’s growth to a new Dark Lord, master and god of Men; and Numenor- 
Atlantis. They are dealt with annalistically, and in two Tales or Accounts, The 
Rings of Power and the Downfall of Numenor. Both are the essential background 
to The Hobbit and its sequel. 

In the first we see a sort of second fall or at least ‘error’ of the Elves. There 
was nothing wrong essentially in their lingering against counsel, still sadly with* 


the mortal lands of their old heroic deeds. But they wanted to have their cake 
without eating it. They wanted the peace and bliss and perfect memory of The 
West’, and yet to remain on the ordinary earth where their prestige as the highest 
people, above wild Elves, dwarves, and Men, was greater than at the bottom of 
the hierarchy of Valinor. They thus became obsessed with ‘fading’, the mode in 
which the changes of time (the law of the world under the sun) was perceived by 
them. They became sad, and their art (shall we say) antiquarian, and their efforts 
all really a kind of embalming - even though they also retained the old motive of 
their kind, the adornment of earth, and the healing of its hurts. We hear of a 
lingering kingdom, in the extreme North-west more or less in what was left in 
the old lands of The Silmarillion, under Gilgalad; and of other settlements, such 
as Imladris (Rivendell) near Elrond; and a great one at Eregion at the Western 
feet of the Misty Mountains, adjacent to the Mines of Moria, the major realm of 
the Dwarves in the Second Age. There arose a friendship between the usually 
hostile folk (of Elves and Dwarves) for the first and only time, and smithcraft 
reached its highest development. But many of the Elves listened to Sauron. He 
was still fair in that early time, and his motives and those of the Elves seemed to 
go partly together: the healing of the desolate lands. Sauron found their weak 
point in suggesting that, helping one another, they could make Western Middle- 
earth as beautiful as Valinor. It was really a veiled attack on the gods, an 
incitement to try and make a separate independent paradise. Gilgalad repulsed all 
such overtures, as also did Elrond. But at Eregion great work began - and the 
Elves came their nearest to falling to ‘magic’ and machinery. With the aid of 
Sauron’s lore they made Rings of Power (‘power’ is an ominous and sinister 
word in all these tales, except as applied to the gods). 

The chief power (of all the rings alike) was the prevention or slowing of decay 
(i.e. ‘change’ viewed as a regrettable thing), the preservation of what is desired 
or loved, or its semblance - this is more or less an Elvish motive. But also they 
enhanced the natural powers of a possessor - thus approaching ‘magic’, a motive 
easily corruptible into evil, a lust for domination. And finally they had other 
powers, more directly derived from Sauron (‘the Necromancer’: so he is called 
as he casts a fleeting shadow and presage on the pages of The Hobbit ): such as 
rendering invisible the material body, and making things of the invisible world 
visible. 

The Elves of Eregion made Three supremely beautiful and powerful rings, 
almost solely of their own imagination, and directed to the preservation of 
beauty: they did not confer invisibility. But secretly in the subterranean Fire, in 
his own Black Land, Sauron made One Ring, the Ruling Ring that contained the 
powers of all the others, and controlled them, so that its wearer could see the 



thoughts of all those that used the lesser rings, could govern all that they did, and 
in the end could utterly enslave them. He reckoned, however, without the 
wisdom and subtle perceptions of the Elves. The moment he assumed the One, 
they were aware of it, and of his secret purpose, and were afraid. They hid the 
Three Rings, so that not even Sauron ever discovered where they were and they 
remained unsullied. The others they tried to destroy. 

In the resulting war between Sauron and the Elves Middle-earth, especially in 
the west, was further ruined. Eregion was captured and destroyed, and Sauron 
seized many Rings of Power. These he gave, for their ultimate corruption and 
enslavement, to those who would accept them (out of ambition or greed). Hence 
the ‘ancient rhyme’ that appears as the leit-motif of The Lord of the Rings, 


Three Rings for the Elven-Kings under the sky, 
Seven for the Dwarf-lords in their halls of stone, 
Nine for Mortal Men doomed to die, 

One for the Dark Lord on his dark throne 
In the Land of Mordor where the shadows he. 


Sauron became thus almost supreme in Middle-earth. The Elves held out in 
secret places (not yet revealed). The last Elf-Kingdom of Gilgalad is maintained 
precariously on the extreme west-shores, where are the havens of the Ships. 
Elrond the Half-elven, son of Earendil, maintains a kind of enchanted sanctuary 
at Imladris (in English Rivendell) on the extreme eastern margin of the western 
lands.* But Sauron dominates all the multiplying hordes of Men that have had 
no contact with the Elves and so indirectly with the true and unfallen Valar and 
gods. He rules a growing empire from the great dark tower of Barad-dur in 
Mordor, near to the Mountain of Fire, wielding the One Ring. 

But to achieve this he had been obliged to let a great part of his own inherent 
power (a frequent and very significant motive in myth and fairy-story) pass into 
the One Ring. While he wore it, his power on earth was actually enhanced. But 
even if he did not wear it, that power existed and was in ‘rapport’ with himself: 
he was not ‘diminished’. Unless some other seized it and became possessed of it. 
If that happened, the new possessor could (if sufficiently strong and heroic by 
nature) challenge Sauron, become master of all that he had learned or done since 
the making of the One Ring, and so overthrow him and usurp his place. This was 
the essential weakness he had introduced into his situation in his effort (largely 
unsuccessful) to enslave the Elves, and in his desire to establish a control over 


the minds and wills of his servants. There was another weakness: if the One 
Ring was actually unmade, annihilated, then its power would be dissolved, 
Sauron’s own being would be diminished to vanishing point, and he would be 
reduced to a shadow, a mere memory of malicious will. But that he never 
contemplated nor feared. The Ring was unbreakable by any smithcraft less than 
his own. It was indissoluble in any fire, save the undying subterranean fire where 
it was made - and that was unapproachable, in Mordor. Also so great was the 
Ring’s power of lust, that anyone who used it became mastered by it; it was 
beyond the strength of any will (even his own) to injure it, cast it away, or 
neglect it. So he thought. It was in any case on his finger. 

Thus, as the Second Age draws on, we have a great Kingdom and evil 
theocracy (for Sauron is also the god of his slaves) growing up in Middle-earth. 
In the West - actually the North-West is the only part clearly envisaged in these 
tales - lie the precarious refuges of the Elves, while Men in those parts remain 
more or less uncorrupted if ignorant. The better and nobler sort of Men are in 
fact the kin of those that had departed to Numenor, but remain in a simple 
‘Homeric’ state of patriarchal and tribal life. 

Meanwhile Numenor has grown in wealth, wisdom, and glory, under its lines 
of great kings of long life, directly descended from Elros, Earendil’s son, brother 
of Elrond. The Downfall of Numenor, the Second Fall of Man (or Man 
rehabilitated but still mortal), brings on the catastrophic end, not only of the 
Second Age, but of the Old World, the primeval world of legend (envisaged as 
flat and bounded). After which the Third Age began, a Twilight Age, a Medium 
Aevum, the first of the broken and changed world; the last of the lingering 
dominion of visible fully incarnate Elves, and the last also in which Evil assumes 
a single dominant incarnate shape. 

The Downfall is partly the result of an inner weakness in Men - consequent, if 
you will, upon the first Fall (unrecorded in these tales), repented but not finally 
healed. Reward on earth is more dangerous for men than punishment! The Fall is 
achieved by the cunning of Sauron in exploiting this weakness. Its central theme 
is (inevitably, I think, in a story of Men) a Ban, or Prohibition. 

The Numenoreans dwell within far sight of the easternmost ‘immortal’ land, 
Eressea; and as the only men to speak an Elvish tongue (learned in the days of 
their Alliance) they are in constant communication with their ancient friends and 
allies, either in the bliss of Eressea, or in the kingdom of Gilgalad on the shores 
of Middle-earth. They became thus in appearance, and even in powers of mind, 
hardly distinguishable from the Elves - but they remained mortal, even though 
rewarded by a triple, or more than a triple, span of years. Their reward is their 
undoing - or the means of their temptation. Their long life aids their 



achievements in art and wisdom, but breeds a possessive attitude to these things, 
and desire awakes for more time for their enjoyment. Foreseeing this in part, the 
gods laid a Ban on the Numenoreans from the beginning: they must never sail to 
Eressea, nor westward out of sight of their own land. In all other directions they 
could go as they would. They must not set foot on ‘immortal’ lands, and so 
become enamoured of an immortality (within the world), which was against their 
law, the special doom or gift of Iluvatar (God), and which their nature could not 
in fact endure.* 

There are three phases in their fall from grace. First acquiescence, obedience 
that is free and willing, though without complete understanding. Then for long 
they obey unwillingly, murmuring more and more openly. Finally they rebel - 
and a rift appears between the King’s men and rebels, and the small minority of 
persecuted Faithful. 

In the first stage, being men of peace, their courage is devoted to sea-voyages. 
As descendants of Earendil, they became the supreme mariners, and being 
barred from the West, they sail to the uttermost north, and south, and east. 
Mostly they come to the west-shores of Middle-earth, where they aid the Elves 
and Men against Sauron, and incur his undying hatred. In those days they would 
come amongst Wild Men as almost divine benefactors, bringing gifts of arts and 
knowledge, and passing away again - leaving many legends behind of kings and 
gods out of the sunset. 

In the second stage, the days of Pride and Glory and grudging of the Ban, they 
begin to seek wealth rather than bliss. The desire to escape death produced a cult 
of the dead, and they lavished wealth and art on tombs and memorials. They now 
made settlements on the west-shores, but these became rather strongholds and 
‘factories’ of lords seeking wealth, and the Numenoreans became tax-gatherers 
carrying off over the sea ever more and more goods in their great ships. The 
Numenoreans began the forging of arms and engines. 

This phase ended and the last began with the ascent of the throne by the 
thirteenth! king of the line of Elros, Tar-Calion the Golden, the most powerful 
and proud of all kings. When he learned that Sauron had taken the title of King 
of Kings and Lord of the World, he resolved to put down the ‘pretender’. He 
goes in strength and majesty to Middle-earth, and so vast is his armament, and so 
terrible are the Numenoreans in the day of their glory that Sauron’s servants will 
not face them. Sauron humbles himself, does homage to Tar-Calion, and is 
carried off to Numenor as hostage and prisoner. But there he swiftly rises by his 
cunning and knowledge from servant to chief counsellor of the king, and seduces 
the king and most of the lords and people with his lies. He denies the existence 
of God, saying that the One is a mere invention of the jealous Valar of the West, 


the oracle of their own wishes. The chief of the gods is he that dwells in the 
Void, who will conquer in the end, and in the void make endless realms for his 
servants. The Ban is only a lying device of fear to restrain the Kings of Men 
from seizing everlasting life and rivalling the Valar. 

A new religion, and worship of the Dark, with its temple under Sauron arises. 
The Faithful are persecuted and sacrificed. The Numenoreans carry their evil 
also to Middle-earth and there become cruel and wicked lords of necromancy, 
slaying and tormenting men; and the old legends are overlaid with dark tales of 
horror. This does not happen, however, in the North West; for thither, because of 
the Elves, only the Faithful who remain Elf-friends will come. The chief haven 
of the good Numenoreans is near the mouth of the great river Anduin. Thence 
the still beneficent influence of Numenor spreads up the River and along the 
coasts as far north as the realm of Gilgalad, as a Common Speech grows up. 

But at last Sauron’s plot comes to fulfilment, Tar-Calion feels old age and 
death approaching, and he listens to the last prompting of Sauron, and building 
the greatest of all armadas, he sets sail into the West, breaking the Ban, and 
going up with war to wrest from the gods ‘everlasting life within the circles of 
the world’. Faced by this rebellion, of appalling folly and blasphemy, and also 
real peril (since the Numenoreans directed by Sauron could have wrought ruin in 
Valinor itself ) the Valar lay down their delegated power and appeal to God, and 
receive the power and permission to deal with the situation; the old world is 
broken and changed. A chasm is opened in the sea and Tar-Calion and his 
armada is engulfed. Numenor itself on the edge of the rift topples and vanishes 
for ever with all its glory in the abyss. Thereafter there is no visible dwelling of 
the divine or immortal on earth. Valinor (or Paradise) and even Eressea are 
removed, remaining only in the memory of the earth. Men may sail now West, if 
they will, as far as they may, and come no nearer to Valinor or the Blessed 
Realm, but return only into the east and so back again; for the world is round, 
and finite, and a circle inescapable - save by death. Only the ‘immortals’, the 
lingering Elves, may still if they will, wearying of the circle of the world, take 
ship and find the ‘straight way’, and come to the ancient or True West, and be at 
peace. 

So the end of the Second Age draws on in a major catastrophe; but it is not yet 
quite concluded. From the cataclysm there are survivors: Elendil the Fair, chief 
of the Faithful (his name means Elf-friend ), and his sons Isildur and Anarion. 
Elendil, a Noachian figure, who has held off from the rebellion, and kept ships 
manned and furnished off the east coast of Numenor, flees before the 
overwhelming storm of the wrath of the West, and is borne high upon the 
towering waves that bring ruin to the west of the Middle-earth. He and his folk 



are cast away as exiles upon the shores. There they establish the Numenorean 
kingdoms of Arnor in the north close to the realm of Gilgalad, and Gondor about 
the mouths of Anduin further south. Sauron, being an immortal, hardly escapes 
the ruin of Numenor and returns to Mordor, where after a while he is strong 
enough to challenge the exiles of Numenor. 

The Second Age ends with the Last Alliance (of Elves and Men), and the great 
siege of Mordor. It ends with the overthrow of Sauron and destruction of the 
second visible incarnation of evil. But at a cost, and with one disastrous mistake. 
Gilgalad and Elendil are slain in the act of slaying Sauron. Isildur, Elendil’s son, 
cuts the ring from Sauron’s hand, and his power departs, and his spirit flees into 
the shadows. But the evil begins to work. Isildur claims the Ring as his own, as 
‘the Weregild of his father’, and refuses to cast it into the Fire nearby. He 
marches away, but is drowned in the Great River, and the Ring is lost, passing 
out of all knowledge. But it is not unmade, and the Dark Tower built with its aid 
still stands, empty but not destroyed. So ends the Second Age with the coming of 
the Numenorean realms and the passing of the last kingship of the High Elves. 



AINULINDALE 



ATNUT.INDAT.F, 


The Music of the Ainur 

There was Eru, the One, who in Arda is called Iluvatar; and he made first the 
Ainur, the Holy Ones, that were the offspring of his thought, and they were with 
him before aught else was made. And he spoke to them, propounding to them 
themes of music; and they sang before him, and he was glad. But for a long 
while they sang only each alone, or but few together, while the rest hearkened; 
for each comprehended only that part of the mind of Iluvatar from which he 
came, and in the understanding of their brethren they grew but slowly. Yet ever 
as they listened they came to deeper understanding, and increased in unison and 
harmony. 

And it came to pass that Iluvatar called together all the Ainur and declared to 
them a mighty theme, unfolding to them things greater and more wonderful than 
he had yet revealed; and the glory of its beginning and the splendour of its end 
amazed the Ainur, so that they bowed before Iluvatar and were silent. 

Then Iluvatar said to them: ‘Of the theme that I have declared to you, I will 
now that ye make in harmony together a Great Music. And since I have kindled 
you with the Flame Imperishable, ye shall show forth your powers in adorning 
this theme, each with his own thoughts and devices, if he will. But I will sit and 
hearken, and be glad that through you great beauty has been wakened into song.’ 

Then the voices of the Ainur, like unto harps and lutes, and pipes and 
trumpets, and viols and organs, and like unto countless choirs singing with 
words, began to fashion the theme of Iluvatar to a great music; and a sound arose 
of endless interchanging melodies woven in harmony that passed beyond hearing 
into the depths and into the heights, and the places of the dwelling of Iluvatar 
were filled to overflowing, and the music and the echo of the music went out 
into the Void, and it was not void. Never since have the Ainur made any music 
like to this music, though it has been said that a greater still shall be made before 
Iluvatar by the choirs of the Ainur and the Children of Iluvatar after the end of 
days. Then the themes of Iluvatar shall be played aright, and take Being in the 
moment of their utterance, for all shall then understand fully his intent in their 
part, and each shall know the comprehension of each, and Iluvatar shall give to 
their thoughts the secret fire, being well pleased. 



But now Iluvatar sat and hearkened, and for a great while it seemed good to 
him, for in the music there were no flaws. But as the theme progressed, it came 
into the heart of Melkor to interweave matters of his own imagining that were 
not in accord with the theme of Iluvatar; for he sought therein to increase the 
power and glory of the part assigned to himself. To Melkor among the Ainur had 
been given the greatest gifts of power and knowledge, and he had a share in all 
the gifts of his brethren. He had gone often alone into the void places seeking the 
Imperishable Flame; for desire grew hot within him to bring into Being things of 
his own, and it seemed to him that Iluvatar took no thought for the Void, and he 
was impatient of its emptiness. Yet he found not the Fire, for it is with Iluvatar. 
But being alone he had begun to conceive thoughts of his own unlike those of 
his brethren. 

Some of these thoughts he now wove into his music, and straightway discord 
arose about him, and many that sang nigh him grew despondent, and their 
thought was disturbed and their music faltered; but some began to attune their 
music to his rather than to the thought which they had at first. Then the discord 
of Melkor spread ever wider, and the melodies which had been heard before 
foundered in a sea of turbulent sound. But Iluvatar sat and hearkened until it 
seemed that about his throne there was a raging storm, as of dark waters that 
made war one upon another in an endless wrath that would not be assuaged. 


Then Iluvatar arose, and the Ainur perceived that he smiled; and he lifted up 
his left hand, and a new theme began amid the storm, like and yet unlike to the 
former theme, and it gathered power and had new beauty. But the discord of 
Melkor rose in uproar and contended with it, and again there was a war of sound 
more violent than before, until many of the Ainur were dismayed and sang no 
longer, and Melkor had the mastery. Then again Iluvatar arose, and the Ainur 
perceived that his countenance was stern; and he lifted up his right hand, and 
behold! a third theme grew amid the confusion, and it was unlike the others. For 
it seemed at first soft and sweet, a mere rippling of gentle sounds in delicate 
melodies; but it could not be quenched, and it took to itself power and 
profundity. And it seemed at last that there were two musics progressing at one 
time before the seat of Iluvatar, and they were utterly at variance. The one was 
deep and wide and beautiful, but slow and blended with an immeasurable 
sorrow, from which its beauty chiefly came. The other had now achieved a unity 
of its own; but it was loud, and vain, and endlessly repeated; and it had little 
harmony, but rather a clamorous unison as of many trumpets braying upon a few 
notes. And it essayed to drown the other music by the violence of its voice, but it 



seemed that its most triumphant notes were taken by the other and woven into its 
own solemn pattern. 

In the midst of this strife, whereat the halls of Iluvatar shook and a tremor ran 
out into the silences yet unmoved, Iluvatar arose a third time, and his face was 
terrible to behold. Then he raised up both his hands, and in one chord, deeper 
than the Abyss, higher than the Firmament, piercing as the light of the eye of 
Iluvatar, the Music ceased. 

Then Iluvatar spoke, and he said: ‘Mighty are the Ainur, and mightiest among 
them is Melkor; but that he may know, and all the Ainur, that I am Iluvatar, those 
things that ye have sung, I will show them forth, that ye may see what ye have 
done. And thou, Melkor, shalt see that no theme may be played that hath not its 
uttermost source in me, nor can any alter the music in my despite. For he that 
attempteth this shall prove but mine instrument in the devising of things more 
wonderful, which he himself hath not imagined.’ 

Then the Ainur were afraid, and they did not yet comprehend the words that 
were said to them; and Melkor was filled with shame, of which came secret 
anger. But Iluvatar arose in splendour, and he went forth from the fair regions 
that he had made for the Ainur; and the Ainur followed him. 

But when they were come into the Void, Iluvatar said to them: ‘Behold your 
Music!’ And he showed to them a vision, giving to them sight where before was 
only hearing; and they saw a new World made visible before them, and it was 
globed amid the Void, and it was sustained therein, but was not of it. And as they 
looked and wondered this World began to unfold its history, and it seemed to 
them that it lived and grew. And when the Ainur had gazed for a while and were 
silent, Iluvatar said again: ‘Behold your Music! This is your minstrelsy; and each 
of you shall find contained herein, amid the design that I set before you, all those 
things which it may seem that he himself devised or added. And thou, Melkor, 
wilt discover all the secret thoughts of thy mind, and wilt perceive that they are 
but a part of the whole and tributary to its glory.’ 

And many other things Iluvatar spoke to the Ainur at that time, and because of 
their memory of his words, and the knowledge that each has of the music that he 
himself made, the Ainur know much of what was, and is, and is to come, and 
few things are unseen by them. Yet some things there are that they cannot see, 
neither alone nor taking counsel together; for to none but himself has Iluvatar 
revealed all that he has in store, and in every age there come forth things that are 
new and have no foretelling, for they do not proceed from the past. And so it was 
that as this vision of the World was played before them, the Ainur saw that it 
contained things which they had not thought. And they saw with amazement the 
coming of the Children of Iluvatar, and the habitation that was prepared for 



them; and they perceived that they themselves in the labour of their music had 
been busy with the preparation of this dwelling, and yet knew not that it had any 
purpose beyond its own beauty. For the Children of Iluvatar were conceived by 
him alone; and they came with the third theme, and were not in the theme which 
Iluvatar propounded at the beginning, and none of the Ainur had part in their 
making. Therefore when they beheld them, the more did they love them, being 
things other than themselves, strange and free, wherein they saw the mind of 
Iluvatar reflected anew, and learned yet a little more of his wisdom, which 
otherwise had been hidden even from the Ainur. 

Now the Children of Iluvatar are Elves and Men, the Firstborn and the 
Followers. And amid all the splendours of the World, its vast halls and spaces, 
and its wheeling fires, Iluvatar chose a place for their habitation in the Deeps of 
Time and in the midst of the innumerable stars. And this habitation might seem a 
little thing to those who consider only the majesty of the Ainur, and not their 
terrible sharpness; as who should take the whole field of Arda for the foundation 
of a pillar and so raise it until the cone of its summit were more bitter than a 
needle; or who consider only the immeasurable vastness of the World, which still 
the Ainur are shaping, and not the minute precision to which they shape all 
things therein. But when the Ainur had beheld this habitation in a vision and had 
seen the Children of Iluvatar arise therein, then many of the most mighty among 
them bent all their thought and their desire towards that place. And of these 
Melkor was the chief, even as he was in the beginning the greatest of the Ainur 
who took part in the Music. And he feigned, even to himself at first, that he 
desired to go thither and order all things for the good of the Children of Iluvatar, 
controlling the turmoils of the heat and the cold that had come to pass through 
him. But he desired rather to subdue to his will both Elves and Men, envying the 
gifts with which Iluvatar promised to endow them; and he wished himself to 
have subjects and servants, and to be called Lord, and to be a master over other 
wills. 

But the other Ainur looked upon this habitation set within the vast spaces of 
the World, which the Elves call Arda, the Earth; and their hearts rejoiced in light, 
and their eyes beholding many colours were filled with gladness; but because of 
the roaring of the sea they felt a great unquiet. And they observed the winds and 
the air, and the matters of which Arda was made, of iron and stone and silver and 
gold and many substances: but of all these water they most greatly praised. And 
it is said by the Eldar that in water there lives yet the echo of the Music of the 
Ainur more than in any substance else that is in this Earth; and many of the 
Children of Iluvatar hearken still unsated to the voices of the Sea, and yet know 
not for what they listen. 



Now to water had that Ainu whom the Elves call Ulmo turned his thought, 
and of all most deeply was he instructed by Iluvatar in music. But of the airs and 
winds Manwe most had pondered, who is the noblest of the Ainur. Of the fabric 
of Earth had Aule thought, to whom Iluvatar had given skill and knowledge 
scarce less than to Melkor; but the delight and pride of Aule is in the deed of 
making, and in the thing made, and neither in possession nor in his own mastery; 
wherefore he gives and hoards not, and is free from care, passing ever on to 
some new work. 

And Iluvatar spoke to Ulmo, and said: ‘Seest thou not how here in this little 
realm in the Deeps of Time Melkor hath made war upon thy province? He hath 
bethought him of bitter cold immoderate, and yet hath not destroyed the beauty 
of thy fountains, nor of thy clear pools. Behold the snow, and the cunning work 
of frost! Melkor hath devised heats and fire without restraint, and hath not dried 
up thy desire nor utterly quelled the music of the sea. Behold rather the height 
and glory of the clouds, and the everchanging mists; and listen to the fall of rain 
upon the Earth! And in these clouds thou art drawn nearer to Manwe, thy friend, 
whom thou lovest.’ 

Then Ulmo answered: 'Truly, Water is become now fairer than my heart 
imagined, neither had my secret thought conceived the snowflake, nor in all my 
music was contained the falling of the rain. I will seek Manwe, that he and I may 
make melodies for ever to thy delight!’ And Manwe and Ulmo have from the 
beginning been allied, and in all things have served most faithfully the purpose 
of Iluvatar. 


But even as Ulmo spoke, and while the Ainur were yet gazing upon this 
vision, it was taken away and hidden from their sight; and it seemed to them that 
in that moment they perceived a new thing, Darkness, which they had not known 
before except in thought. But they had become enamoured of the beauty of the 
vision and engrossed in the unfolding of the World which came there to being, 
and their minds were filled with it; for the history was incomplete and the circles 
of time not full-wrought when the vision was taken away. And some have said 
that the vision ceased ere the fulfilment of the Dominion of Men and the fading 
of the Firstborn; wherefore, though the Music is over all, the Valar have not seen 
as with sight the Later Ages or the ending of the World. 

Then there was unrest among the Ainur; but Iluvatar called to them, and said: 
‘I know the desire of your minds that what ye have seen should verily be, not 
only in your thought, but even as ye yourselves are, and yet other. Therefore I 
say: Ed! Let these things Be! And I will send forth into the Void the Flame 



Imperishable, and it shall be at the heart of the World, and the World shall Be; 
and those of you that will may go down into it.’ And suddenly the Ainur saw afar 
off a light, as it were a cloud with a living heart of flame; and they knew that this 
was no vision only, but that Iluvatar had made a new thing: Ea, the World that Is. 

Thus it came to pass that of the Ainur some abode still with Iluvatar beyond 
the confines of the World; but others, and among them many of the greatest and 
most fair, took the leave of Iluvatar and descended into it. But this condition 
Iluvatar made, or it is the necessity of their love, that their power should 
thenceforward be contained and bounded in the World, to be within it for ever, 
until it is complete, so that they are its life and it is theirs. And therefore they are 
named the Valar, the Powers of the World. 

But when the Valar entered into Ea they were at first astounded and at a loss, 
for it was as if naught was yet made which they had seen in vision, and all was 
but on point to begin and yet unshaped, and it was dark. For the Great Music had 
been but the growth and flowering of thought in the Timeless Halls, and the 
Vision only a foreshowing; but now they had entered in at the beginning of 
Time, and the Valar perceived that the World had been but foreshadowed and 
foresung, and they must achieve it. So began their great labours in wastes 
unmeasured and unexplored, and in ages uncounted and forgotten, until in the 
Deeps of Time and in the midst of the vast halls of Ea there came to be that hour 
and that place where was made the habitation of the Children of Iluvatar. And in 
this work the chief part was taken by Manwe and Aule and Ulmo; but Melkor 
too was there from the first, and he meddled in all that was done, turning it if he 
might to his own desires and purposes; and he kindled great fires. When 
therefore Earth was yet young and full of flame Melkor coveted it, and he said to 
the other Valar: ‘This shall be my own kingdom; and I name it unto myself ! 5 

But Manwe was the brother of Melkor in the mind of Iluvatar, and he was the 
chief instrument of the second theme that Iluvatar had raised up against the 
discord of Melkor; and he called unto himself many spirits both greater and less, 
and they came down into the fields of Arda and aided Manwe, lest Melkor 
should hinder the fulfilment of their labour for ever, and Earth should wither ere 
it flowered. And Manwe said unto Melkor: ‘This kingdom thou shalt not take for 
thine own, wrongfully, for many others have laboured here no less than thou.’ 
And there was strife between Melkor and the other Valar; and for that time 
Melkor withdrew and departed to other regions and did there what he would; but 
he did not put the desire of the Kingdom of Arda from his heart. 

Now the Valar took to themselves shape and hue; and because they were 
drawn into the World by love of the Children of Iluvatar, for whom they hoped, 
they took shape after that manner which they had beheld in the Vision of 



Iluvatar, save only in majesty and splendour. Moreover their shape comes of 
their knowledge of the visible World, rather than of the World itself; and they 
need it not, save only as we use raiment, and yet we may be naked and suffer no 
loss of our being. Therefore the Valar may walk, if they will, unclad, and then 
even the Eldar cannot clearly perceive them, though they be present. But when 
they desire to clothe themselves the Valar take upon them forms some as of male 
and some as of female; for that difference of temper they had even from their 
beginning, and it is but bodied forth in the choice of each, not made by the 
choice, even as with us male and female may be shown by the raiment but is not 
made thereby. But the shapes wherein the Great Ones array themselves are not at 
all times like to the shapes of the kings and queens of the Children of Iluvatar; 
for at times they may clothe themselves in their own thought, made visible in 
forms of majesty and dread. 

And the Valar drew unto them many companions, some less, some well nigh 
as great as themselves, and they laboured together in the ordering of the Earth 
and the curbing of its tumults. Then Melkor saw what was done, and that the 
Valar walked on Earth as powers visible, clad in the raiment of the World, and 
were lovely and glorious to see, and blissful, and that the Earth was becoming as 
a garden for their delight, for its turmoils were subdued. His envy grew then the 
greater within him; and he also took visible form, but because of his mood and 
the malice that burned in him that form was dark and terrible. And he descended 
upon Arda in power and majesty greater than any other of the Valar, as a 
mountain that wades in the sea and has its head above the clouds and is clad in 
ice and crowned with smoke and fire; and the light of the eyes of Melkor was 
like a flame that withers with heat and pierces with a deadly cold. 

Thus began the first battle of the Valar with Melkor for the dominion of Arda; 
and of those tumults the Elves know but little. For what has here been declared is 
come from the Valar themselves, with whom the Eldalie spoke in the land of 
Valinor, and by whom they were instructed; but little would the Valar ever tell of 
the wars before the coming of the Elves. Yet it is told among the Eldar that the 
Valar endeavoured ever, in despite of Melkor, to rule the Earth and to prepare it 
for the coming of the Firstborn; and they built lands and Melkor destroyed them; 
valleys they delved and Melkor raised them up; mountains they carved and 
Melkor threw them down; seas they hollowed and Melkor spilled them; and 
naught might have peace or come to lasting growth, for as surely as the Valar 
began a labour so would Melkor undo it or corrupt it. And yet their labour was 
not all in vain; and though nowhere and in no work was their will and purpose 
wholly fulfilled, and all things were in hue and shape other than the Valar had at 
first intended, slowly nonetheless the Earth was fashioned and made firm. And 



thus was the habitation of the Children of Iluvatar established at the last in the 
Deeps of Time and amidst the innumerable stars. 










VALAQUENTA 



VAT.AQUF.NTA 


Account of the Valar and Maiar according to the lore of the Eldar 

In the beginning Eru, the One, who in the Elvish tongue is named Iluvatar, made 
the Ainur of his thought; and they made a great Music before him. In this Music 
the World was begun; for Iluvatar made visible the song of the Ainur, and they 
beheld it as a light in the darkness. And many among them became enamoured 
of its beauty, and of its history which they saw beginning and unfolding as in a 
vision. Therefore Iluvatar gave to their vision Being, and set it amid the Void, 
and the Secret Fire was sent to burn at the heart of the World; and it was called 
Ea. 

Then those of the Ainur who desired it arose and entered into the World at the 
beginning of Time; and it was their task to achieve it, and by their labours to 
fulfil the vision which they had seen. Long they laboured in the regions of Ea, 
which are vast beyond the thought of Elves and Men, until in the time appointed 
was made Arda, the Kingdom of Earth. Then they put on the raiment of Earth 
and descended into it, and dwelt therein. 


Of the Valar 

The Great among these spirits the Elves name the Valar, the Powers of Arda, and 
Men have often called them gods. The Lords of the Valar are seven; and the 
Valier, the Queens of the Valar, are seven also. These were their names in the 
Elvish tongue as it was spoken in Valinor, though they have other names in the 
speech of the Elves in Middle-earth, and their names among Men are manifold. 
The names of the Lords in due order are: Manwe, Ulmo, Aule, Orome, Mandos, 
Lorien, and Tulkas; and the names of the Queens are: Varda, Yavanna, Nienna, 
Este, Vaire, Vana, and Nessa. Melkor is counted no longer among the Valar, and 
his name is not spoken upon Earth. 


Manwe and Melkor were brethren in the thought of Iluvatar. The mightiest of 
those Ainur who came into the World was in his beginning Melkor; but Manwe 



is dearest to Iluvatar and understands most clearly his purposes. He was 
appointed to be, in the fullness of time, the first of all Kings: lord of the realm of 
Arda and ruler of all that dwell therein. In Arda his delight is in the winds and 
the clouds, and in all the regions of the air, from the heights to the depths, from 
the utmost borders of the Veil of Arda to the breezes that blow in the grass. 
Sulimo he is surnamed, Lord of the Breath of Arda. All swift birds, strong of 
wing, he loves, and they come and go at his bidding. 

With Manwe dwells Varda, Lady of the Stars, who knows all the regions of 
Ea. Too great is her beauty to be declared in the words of Men or of Elves; for 
the light of Iluvatar lives still in her face. In light is her power and her joy. Out of 
the deeps of Ea she came to the aid of Manwe; for Melkor she knew from before 
the making of the Music and rejected him, and he hated her, and feared her more 
than all others whom Eru made. Manwe and Varda are seldom parted, and they 
remain in Valinor. Their halls are above the everlasting snow, upon Oiolosse, the 
uttermost tower of Taniquetil, tallest of all the mountains upon Earth. When 
Manwe there ascends his throne and looks forth, if Varda is beside him, he sees 
further than all other eyes, through mist, and through darkness, and over the 
leagues of the sea. And if Manwe is with her, Varda hears more clearly than all 
other ears the sound of voices that cry from east to west, from the hills and the 
valleys, and from the dark places that Melkor has made upon Earth. Of all the 
Great Ones who dwell in this world the Elves hold Varda most in reverence and 
love. Elbereth they name her, and they call upon her name out of the shadows of 
Middle-earth, and uplift it in song at the rising of the stars. 

Ulmo is the Lord of Waters. He is alone. He dwells nowhere long, but moves 
as he will in all the deep waters about the Earth or under the Earth. He is next in 
might to Manwe, and before Valinor was made he was closest to him in 
friendship; but thereafter he went seldom to the councils of the Valar, unless 
great matters were in debate. For he kept all Arda in thought, and he has no need 
of any resting-place. Moreover he does not love to walk upon land, and will 
seldom clothe himself in a body after the manner of his peers. If the Children of 
Eru beheld him they were filled with a great dread; for the arising of the King of 
the Sea was terrible, as a mounting wave that strides to the land, with dark helm 
foam-crested and raiment of mail shimmering from silver down into shadows of 
green. The trumpets of Manwe are loud, but Ulmo’s voice is deep as the deeps of 
the ocean which he only has seen. 

Nonetheless Ulmo loves both Elves and Men, and never abandoned them, not 
even when they lay under the wrath of the Valar. At times he will come unseen 
to the shores of Middle-earth, or pass far inland up firths of the sea, and there 
make music upon his great horns, the Ulumuri, that are wrought of white shell; 



and those to whom that music comes hear it ever after in their hearts, and 
longing for the sea never leaves them again. But mostly Ulmo speaks to those 
who dwell in Middle-earth with voices that are heard only as the music of water. 
For all seas, lakes, rivers, fountains and springs are in his government; so that 
the Elves say that the spirit of Ulmo runs in all the veins of the world. Thus news 
comes to Ulmo, even in the deeps, of all the needs and griefs of Arda, which 
otherwise would be hidden from Manwe. 

Aule has might little less than Ulmo. His lordship is over all the substances of 
which Arda is made. In the beginning he wrought much in fellowship with 
Manwe and Ulmo; and the fashioning of all lands was his labour. He is a smith 
and a master of all crafts, and he delights in works of skill, however small, as 
much as in the mighty building of old. His are the gems that lie deep in the Earth 
and the gold that is fair in the hand, no less than the walls of the mountains and 
the basins of the sea. The Noldor learned most of him, and he was ever their 
friend. Melkor was jealous of him, for Aule was most like himself in thought and 
in powers; and there was long strife between them, in which Melkor ever marred 
or undid the works of Aule, and Aule grew weary in repairing the tumults and 
disorders of Melkor. Both, also, desired to make things of their own that should 
be new and unthought of by others, and delighted in the praise of their skill. But 
Aule remained faithful to Eru and submitted all that he did to his will; and he did 
not envy the works of others, but sought and gave counsel. Whereas Melkor 
spent his spirit in envy and hate, until at last he could make nothing save in 
mockery of the thought of others, and all their works he destroyed if he could. 

The spouse of Aule is Yavanna, the Giver of Fruits. She is the lover of all 
things that grow in the earth, and all their countless forms she holds in her mind, 
from the trees like towers in forests long ago to the moss upon stones or the 
small and secret things in the mould. In reverence Yavanna is next to Varda 
among the Queens of the Valar. In the form of a woman she is tall, and robed in 
green; but at times she takes other shapes. Some there are who have seen her 
standing like a tree under heaven, crowned with the Sun; and from all its 
branches there spilled a golden dew upon the barren earth, and it grew green 
with corn; but the roots of the tree were in the waters of Ulmo, and the winds of 
Manwe spoke in its leaves. Kementari, Queen of the Earth, she is surnamed in 
the Eldarin tongue. 

The Feanturi, masters of spirits, are brethren, and they are called most often 
Mandos and Lorien. Yet these are rightly the names of the places of their 
dwelling, and their tme names are Namo and Irmo. 

Namo the elder dwells in Mandos, which is westward in Valinor. He is the 
keeper of the Houses of the Dead, and the summoner of the spirits of the slain. 



He forgets nothing; and he knows all things that shall be, save only those that lie 
still in the freedom of Iluvatar. He is the Doomsman of the Valar; but he 
pronounces his dooms and his judgements only at the bidding of Manwe. Vaire 
the Weaver is his spouse, who weaves all things that have ever been in Time into 
her storied webs, and the halls of Mandos that ever widen as the ages pass are 
clothed with them. 

Irmo the younger is the master of visions and dreams. In Lorien are his 
gardens in the land of the Valar, and they are the fairest of all places in the world, 
filled with many spirits. Este the gentle, healer of hurts and of weariness, is his 
spouse. Grey is her raiment; and rest is her gift. She walks not by day, but sleeps 
upon an island in the tree-shadowed lake of Lorellin. From the fountains of Irmo 
and Este all those who dwell in Valinor draw refreshment; and often the Valar 
come themselves to Lorien and there find repose and easing of the burden of 
Arda. 

Mightier than Este is Nienna, sister of the Feanturi; she dwells alone. She is 
acquainted with grief, and mourns for every wound that Arda has suffered in the 
marring of Melkor. So great was her sorrow, as the Music unfolded, that her 
song turned to lamentation long before its end, and the sound of mourning was 
woven into the themes of the World before it began. But she does not weep for 
herself; and those who hearken to her learn pity, and endurance in hope. Her 
halls are west of West, upon the borders of the world; and she comes seldom to 
the city of Valimar where all is glad. She goes rather to the halls of Mandos, 
which are near to her own; and all those who wait in Mandos cry to her, for she 
brings strength to the spirit and turns sorrow to wisdom. The windows of her 
house look outward from the walls of the world. 

Greatest in strength and deeds of prowess is Tulkas, who is surnamed Astaldo, 
the Valiant. He came last to Arda, to aid the Valar in the first battles with Melkor. 
He delights in wrestling and in contests of strength; and he rides no steed, for he 
can outrun all things that go on feet, and he is tireless. His hair and beard are 
golden, and his flesh ruddy; his weapons are his hands. He has little heed for 
either the past or the future, and is of no avail as a counsellor, but is a hardy 
friend. His spouse is Nessa, the sister of Orome, and she also is lithe and 
fleetfooted. Deer she loves, and they follow her train whenever she goes in the 
wild; but she can outrun them, swift as an arrow with the wind in her hair. In 
dancing she delights, and she dances in Valimar on lawns of never-fading green. 

Orome is a mighty lord. If he is less strong than Tulkas, he is more dreadful in 
anger; whereas Tulkas laughs ever, in sport or in war, and even in the face of 
Melkor he laughed in battles before the Elves were born. Orome loved the lands 
of Middle-earth, and he left them unwillingly and came last to Valinor; and often 



of old he passed back east over the mountains and returned with his host to the 
hills and the plains. He is a hunter of monsters and fell beasts, and he delights in 
horses and in hounds; and all trees he loves, for which reason he is called 
Aldaron, and by the Sindar Tauron, the Lord of Forests. Nahar is the name of his 
horse, white in the sun, and shining silver at night. The Valaroma is the name of 
his great horn, the sound of which is like the upgoing of the Sun in scarlet, or the 
sheer lightning cleaving the clouds. Above all the horns of his host it was heard 
in the woods that Yavanna brought forth in Valinor; for there Orome would train 
his folk and his beasts for the pursuit of the evil creatures of Melkor. The spouse 
of Orome is Vana, the Ever-young; she is the younger sister of Yavanna. All 
flowers spring as she passes and open if she glances upon them; and all birds 
sing at her coming. 


These are the names of the Valar and the Valier, and here is told in brief their 
likenesses, such as the Eldar beheld them in Aman. But fair and noble as were 
the forms in which they were manifest to the Children of Iluvatar, they were but 
a veil upon their beauty and their power. And if little is here said of all that the 
Eldar once knew, that is as nothing compared with their true being, which goes 
back into regions and ages far beyond our thought. Among them Nine were of 
chief power and reverence; but one is removed from their number, and Eight 
remain, the Aratar, the High Ones of Arda: Manwe and Varda, Ulmo, Yavanna 
and Aule, Mandos, Nienna, and Orome. Though Manwe is their King and holds 
their allegiance under Eru, in majesty they are peers, surpassing beyond compare 
all others, whether of the Valar and the Maiar, or of any other order that Iluvatar 
has sent into Ea. 


Of the Maiar 

With the Valar came other spirits whose being also began before the World, of 
the same order as the Valar but of less degree. These are the Maiar, the people of 
the Valar, and their servants and helpers. Their number is not known to the 
Elves, and few have names in any of the tongues of the Children of Iluvatar; for 
though it is otherwise in Aman, in Middle-earth the Maiar have seldom appeared 
in form visible to Elves and Men. 

Chief among the Maiar of Valinor whose names are remembered in the 
histories of the Elder Days are Ilmare, the handmaid of Varda, and Eonwe, the 
banner-bearer and herald of Manwe, whose might in arms is surpassed by none 



in Arda. But of all the Maiar Osse and Uinen are best known to the Children of 
Iluvatar. 

Osse is a vassal of Ulmo, and he is master of the seas that wash the shores of 
Middle-earth. He does not go in the deeps, but loves the coasts and the isles, and 
rejoices in the winds of Manwe; for in storm he delights, and laughs amid the 
roaring of the waves. His spouse is Uinen, the Lady of the Seas, whose hair lies 
spread through all waters under sky. All creatures she loves that live in the salt 
streams, and all weeds that grow there; to her mariners cry, for she can lay calm 
upon the waves, restraining the wildness of Osse. The Numenoreans lived long 
in her protection, and held her in reverence equal to the Valar. 

Melkor hated the Sea, for he could not subdue it. It is said that in the making 
of Arda he endeavoured to draw Osse to his allegiance, promising to him all the 
realm and power of Ulmo, if he would serve him. So it was that long ago there 
arose great tumults in the sea that wrought ruin to the lands. But Uinen, at the 
prayer of Aule, restrained Osse and brought him before Ulmo; and he was 
pardoned and returned to his allegiance, to which he has remained faithful. For 
the most part; for the delight in violence has never wholly departed from him, 
and at times he will rage in his wilfulness without any command from Ulmo his 
lord. Therefore those who dwell by the sea or go up in ships may love him, but 
they do not trust him. 

Melian was the name of a Maia who served both Vana and Este; she dwelt 
long in Lorien, tending the trees that flower in the gardens of Irmo, ere she came 
to Middle-earth. Nightingales sang about her wherever she went. 

Wisest of the Maiar was Olorin. He too dwelt in Lorien, but his ways took him 
often to the house of Nienna, and of her he learned pity and patience. 

Of Melian much is told in the Quenta Silmarillion. But of Olorin that tale does 
not speak; for though he loved the Elves, he walked among them unseen, or in 
form as one of them, and they did not know whence came the fair visions or the 
promptings of wisdom that he put into their hearts. In later days he was the 
friend of all the Children of Iluvatar, and took pity on their sorrows; and those 
who listened to him awoke from despair and put away the imaginations of 
darkness. 


Of the Enemies 


Last of all is set the name of Melkor, He who arises in Might. But that name he 
has forfeited; and the Noldor, who among the Elves suffered most from his 
malice, will not utter it, and they name him Morgoth, the Dark Enemy of the 



World. Great might was given to him by Iluvatar, and he was coeval with 
Manwe. In the powers and knowledge of all the other Valar he had part, but he 
turned them to evil purposes, and squandered his strength in violence and 
tyranny. For he coveted Arda and all that was in it, desiring the kingship of 
Manwe and dominion over the realms of his peers. 

From splendour he fell through arrogance to contempt for all things save 
himself, a spirit wasteful and pitiless. Understanding he turned to subtlety in 
perverting to his own will all that he would use, until he became a liar without 
shame. He began with the desire of Light, but when he could not possess it for 
himself alone, he descended through fire and wrath into a great burning, down 
into Darkness. And darkness he used most in his evil works upon Arda, and 
filled it with fear for all living things. 

Yet so great was the power of his uprising that in ages forgotten he contended 
with Manwe and all the Valar, and through long years in Arda held dominion 
over most of the lands of the Earth. But he was not alone. For of the Maiar many 
were drawn to his splendour in the days of his greatness, and remained in that 
allegiance down into his darkness; and others he corrupted afterwards to his 
service with lies and treacherous gifts. Dreadful among these spirits were the 
Valaraukar, the scourges of fire that in Middle-earth were called the Balrogs, 
demons of terror. 

Among those of his servants that have names the greatest was that spirit 
whom the Eldar called Sauron, or Gorthaur the Cruel. In his beginning he was of 
the Maiar of Aule, and he remained mighty in the lore of that people. In all the 
deeds of Melkor the Morgoth upon Arda, in his vast works and in the deceits of 
his cunning, Sauron had a part, and was only less evil than his master in that for 
long he served another and not himself. But in after years he rose like a shadow 
of Morgoth and a ghost of his malice, and walked behind him on the same 
minous path down into the Void. 


HERE ENDS THE VALAQUENTA 



QUENTA SILMARILLION 


The History of the Silmarils 



CHAPTER 1 



OF THE BEGINNING OF DAYS 


It is told among the wise that the First War began before Arda was full-shaped, 
and ere yet there was anything that grew or walked upon earth; and for long 
Melkor had the upper hand. But in the midst of the war a spirit of great strength 
and hardihood came to the aid of the Valar, hearing in the far heaven that there 
was battle in the Little Kingdom; and Arda was filled with the sound of his 
laughter. So came Tulkas the Strong, whose anger passes like a mighty wind, 
scattering cloud and darkness before it; and Melkor fled before his wrath and his 
laughter, and forsook Arda, and there was peace for a long age. And Tulkas 
remained and became one of the Valar of the Kingdom of Arda; but Melkor 
brooded in the outer darkness, and his hate was given to Tulkas for ever after. 

In that time the Valar brought order to the seas and the lands and the 
mountains, and Yavanna planted at last the seeds that she had long devised. And 
since, when the fires were subdued or buried beneath the primeval hills, there 
was need of light, Aule at the prayer of Yavanna wrought two mighty lamps for 
the lighting of the Middle-earth which he had built amid the encircling seas. 
Then Varda filled the lamps and Manwe hallowed them, and the Valar set them 
upon high pillars, more lofty far than are any mountains of the later days. One 
lamp they raised near to the north of Middle-earth, and it was named Illuin; and 
the other was raised in the south, and it was named Ormal; and the light of the 
Lamps of the Valar flowed out over the Earth, so that all was lit as it were in a 
changeless day. 

Then the seeds that Yavanna had sown began swiftly to sprout and to burgeon, 
and there arose a multitude of growing things great and small, mosses and 
grasses and great ferns, and trees whose tops were crowned with cloud as they 
were living mountains, but whose feet were wrapped in a green twilight. And 
beasts came forth and dwelt in the grassy plains, or in the rivers and the lakes, or 
walked in the shadows of the woods. As yet no flower had bloomed nor any bird 
had sung, for these things waited still their time in the bosom of Yavanna; but 
wealth there was of her imagining, and nowhere more rich than in the midmost 
parts of the Earth, where the light of both the Lamps met and blended. And there 
upon the Isle of Almaren in the Great Lake was the first dwelling of the Valar 
when all things were young, and new-made green was yet a marvel in the eyes of 
the makers; and they were long content. 

Now it came to pass that while the Valar rested from their labours, and 
watched the growth and unfolding of the things that they had devised and begun, 
Manwe ordained a great feast; and the Valar and all their host came at his 



bidding. But Aule and Tulkas were weary; for the craft of Aule and the strength 
of Tulkas had been at the service of all without ceasing in the days of their 
labour. And Melkor knew of all that was done, for even then he had secret 
friends and spies among the Maiar whom he had converted to his cause; and far 
off in the darkness he was filled with hatred, being jealous of the work of his 
peers, whom he desired to make subject to himself. Therefore he gathered to 
himself spirits out of the halls of Ea that he had perverted to his service, and he 
deemed himself strong. And seeing now his time he drew near again to Arda, 
and looked down upon it, and the beauty of the Earth in its Spring filled him the 
more with hate. 

Now therefore the Valar were gathered upon Almaren, fearing no evil, and 
because of the light of Illuin they did not perceive the shadow in the north that 
was cast from afar by Melkor; for he was grown dark as the Night of the Void. 
And it is sung that in that feast of the Spring of Arda Tulkas espoused Nessa the 
sister of Orome, and she danced before the Valar upon the green grass of 
Almaren. 

Then Tulkas slept, being weary and content, and Melkor deemed that his hour 
had come. And he passed therefore over the Walls of the Night with his host, and 
came to Middle-earth far in the north; and the Valar were not aware of him. 

Now Melkor began the delving and building of a vast fortress, deep under 
Earth, beneath dark mountains where the beams of Illuin were cold and dim. 
That stronghold was named Utumno. And though the Valar knew naught of it as 
yet, nonetheless the evil of Melkor and the blight of his hatred flowed out 
thence, and the Spring of Arda was marred. Green things fell sick and rotted, and 
rivers were choked with weeds and slime, and fens were made, rank and 
poisonous, the breeding place of flies; and forests grew dark and perilous, the 
haunts of fear; and beasts became monsters of horn and ivory and dyed the earth 
with blood. Then the Valar knew indeed that Melkor was at work again, and they 
sought for his hiding place. But Melkor, trusting in the strength of Utumno and 
the might of his servants, came forth suddenly to war, and struck the first blow, 
ere the Valar were prepared; and he assailed the lights of Illuin and Ormal, and 
cast down their pillars and broke their lamps. In the overthrow of the mighty 
pillars lands were broken and seas arose in tumult; and when the lamps were 
spilled destroying flame was poured out over the Earth. And the shape of Arda 
and the symmetry of its waters and its lands was marred in that time, so that the 
first designs of the Valar were never after restored. 

In the confusion and the darkness Melkor escaped, though fear fell upon him; 
for above the roaring of the seas he heard the voice of Manwe as a mighty wind, 
and the earth trembled beneath the feet of Tulkas. But he came to Utumno ere 



Tulkas could overtake him; and there he lay hid. And the Valar could not at that 
time overcome him, for the greater part of their strength was needed to restrain 
the tumults of the Earth, and to save from ruin all that could be saved of their 
labour; and afterwards they feared to rend the Earth again, until they knew where 
the Children of Iluvatar were dwelling, who were yet to come in a time that was 
hidden from the Valar. 


Thus ended the Spring of Arda. The dwelling of the Valar upon Almaren was 
utterly destroyed, and they had no abiding place upon the face of the Earth. 
Therefore they departed from Middle-earth and went to the Land of Aman, the 
westernmost of all lands upon the borders of the world; for its west shores 
looked upon the Outer Sea, that is called by the Elves Ekkaia, encircling the 
Kingdom of Arda. How wide is that sea none know but the Valar; and beyond it 
are the Walls of the Night. But the east shores of Aman were the uttermost end 
of Belegaer, the Great Sea of the West; and since Melkor was returned to 
Middle-earth and they could not yet overcome him, the Valar fortified their 
dwelling, and upon the shores of the sea they raised the Pelori, the Mountains of 
Aman, highest upon Earth. And above all the mountains of the Pelori was that 
height upon whose summit Manwe set his throne. Taniquetil the Elves name that 
holy mountain, and Oiolosse Everlasting Whiteness, and Elerrina Crowned with 
Stars, and many names beside; but the Sindar spoke of it in their later tongue as 
Amon Uilos. From their halls upon Taniquetil Manwe and Varda could look out 
across the Earth even into the furthest East. 

Behind the walls of the Pelori the Valar established their domain in that region 
which is called Valinor; and there were their houses, their gardens, and their 
towers. In that guarded land the Valar gathered great store of light and all the 
fairest things that were saved from the ruin; and many others yet fairer they 
made anew, and Valinor became more beautiful even than Middle-earth in the 
Spring of Arda; and it was blessed, for the Deathless dwelt there, and there 
naught faded nor withered, neither was there any stain upon flower or leaf in that 
land, nor any corruption or sickness in anything that lived; for the very stones 
and waters were hallowed. 


And when Valinor was full-wrought and the mansions of the Valar were 
established, in the midst of the plain beyond the mountains they built their city, 
Valmar of many bells. Before its western gate there was a green mound, 
Ezellohar, that is named also Corollaire; and Yavanna hallowed it, and she sat 



there long upon the green grass and sang a song of power, in which was set all 
her thought of things that grow in the earth. But Nienna thought in silence, and 
watered the mould with tears. In that time the Valar were gathered together to 
hear the song of Yavanna, and they sat silent upon their thrones of council in the 
Mahanaxar, the Ring of Doom near to the golden gates of Valmar; and Yavanna 
Kementari sang before them and they watched. 

And as they watched, upon the mound there came forth two slender shoots; 
and silence was over all the world in that hour, nor was there any other sound 
save the chanting of Yavanna. Under her song the saplings grew and became fair 
and tall, and came to flower; and thus there awoke in the world the Two Trees of 
Valinor. Of all things which Yavanna made they have most renown, and about 
their fate all the tales of the Elder Days are woven. 

The one had leaves of dark green that beneath were as shining silver, and from 
each of his countless flowers a dew of silver light was ever falling, and the earth 
beneath was dappled with the shadows of his fluttering leaves. The other bore 
leaves of a young green like the new-opened beech; their edges were of 
glittering gold. Flowers swung upon her branches in clusters of yellow flame, 
formed each to a glowing horn that spilled a golden rain upon the ground; and 
from the blossom of that tree there came forth warmth and a great light. 
Telperion the one was called in Valinor, and Silpion, and Ninquelote, and many 
other names; but Laurelin the other was, and Malinalda, and Culurien, and many 
names in song beside. 

In seven hours the glory of each tree waxed to full and waned again to naught; 
and each awoke once more to life an hour before the other ceased to shine. Thus 
in Valinor twice every day there came a gentle hour of softer light when both 
trees were faint and their gold and silver beams were mingled. Telperion was the 
elder of the trees and came first to full stature and to bloom; and that first hour in 
which he shone, the white glimmer of a silver dawn, the Valar reckoned not into 
the tale of hours, but named it the Opening Hour, and counted from it the ages of 
their reign in Valinor. Therefore at the sixth hour of the First Day, and of all the 
joyful days thereafter, until the Darkening of Valinor, Telperion ceased his time 
of flower; and at the twelfth hour Faurelin her blossoming. And each day of the 
Valar in Aman contained twelve hours, and ended with the second mingling of 
the lights, in which Faurelin was waning but Telperion was waxing. But the light 
that was spilled from the trees endured long, ere it was taken up into the airs or 
sank down into the earth; and the dews of Telperion and the rain that fell from 
Faurelin Varda hoarded in great vats like shining lakes, that were to all the land 
of the Valar as wells of water and of light. Thus began the Days of the Bliss of 
Valinor; and thus began also the Count of Time. 



But as the ages drew on to the hour appointed by Iluvatar for the coming of 
the Firstborn, Middle-earth lay in a twilight beneath the stars that Varda had 
wrought in the ages forgotten of her labours in Ea. And in the darkness Melkor 
dwelt, and still often walked abroad, in many shapes of power and fear, and he 
wielded cold and fire, from the tops of the mountains to the deep furnaces that 
are beneath them; and whatsoever was cruel or violent or deadly in those days is 
laid to his charge. 

From the beauty and bliss of Valinor the Valar came seldom over the 
mountains to Middle-earth, but gave to the land beyond the Pelori their care and 
their love. And in the midst of the Blessed Realm were the mansions of Aule, 
and there he laboured long. For in the making of all things in that land he had the 
chief part, and he wrought there many beautiful and shapely works both openly 
and in secret. Of him comes the lore and knowledge of the Earth and of all 
things that it contains: whether the lore of those that make not, but seek only for 
the understanding of what is, or the lore of all craftsmen: the weaver, the shaper 
of wood, and the worker in metals; and the tiller and husbandman also, though 
these last and all that deal with things that grow and bear fruit must look also to 
the spouse of Aule, Yavanna Kementari. Aule it is who is named the Friend of 
the Noldor, for of him they learned much in after days, and they are the most 
skilled of the Elves; and in their own fashion, according to the gifts which 
Iluvatar gave to them, they added much to his teaching, delighting in tongues 
and in scripts, and in the figures of broidery, of drawing, and of carving. The 
Noldor also it was who first achieved the making of gems; and the fairest of all 
gems were the Silmarils, and they are lost. 

But Manwe Sulimo, highest and holiest of the Valar, sat upon the borders of 
Aman, forsaking not in his thought the Outer Lands. For his throne was set in 
majesty upon the pinnacle of Taniquetil, the highest of the mountains of the 
world, standing upon the margin of the sea. Spirits in the shape of hawks and 
eagles flew ever to and from his halls; and their eyes could see to the depths of 
the seas, and pierce the hidden caverns beneath the world. Thus they brought 
word to him of well nigh all that passed in Arda; yet some things were hidden 
even from the eyes of Manwe and the servants of Manwe, for where Melkor sat 
in his dark thought impenetrable shadows lay. 

Manwe has no thought for his own honour, and is not jealous of his power, but 
rules all to peace. The Vanyar he loved best of all the Elves, and of him they 
received song and poetry; for poetry is the delight of Manwe, and the song of 
words is his music. His raiment is blue, and blue is the fire of his eyes, and his 
sceptre is of sapphire, which the Noldor wrought for him; and he was appointed 
to be the vicegerent of Iluvatar, King of the world of Valar and Elves and Men, 



and the chief defence against the evil of Melkor. With Manwe dwelt Varda the 
most beautiful, she who in the Sindarin tongue is named Elbereth, Queen of the 
Valar, maker of the stars; and with them were a great host of spirits in 
blessedness. 

But Ulmo was alone, and he abode not in Valinor, nor ever came thither unless 
there were need for a great council; he dwelt from the beginning of Arda in the 
Outer Ocean, and still he dwells there. Thence he governs the flowing of all 
waters, and the ebbing, the courses of all rivers and the replenishment of springs, 
the distilling of all dews and rain in every land beneath the sky. In the deep 
places he gives thought to music great and terrible; and the echo of that music 
runs through all the veins of the world in sorrow and in joy; for if joyful is the 
fountain that rises in the sun, its springs are in the wells of sorrow unfathomed at 
the foundations of the Earth. The Teleri learned much of Ulmo, and for this 
reason their music has both sadness and enchantment. Salmar came with him to 
Arda, he who made the horns of Ulmo that none may ever forget who once has 
heard them; and Osse and Uinen also, to whom he gave the government of the 
waves and the movements of the Inner Seas, and many other spirits beside. And 
thus it was by the power of Ulmo that even under the darkness of Melkor life 
coursed still through many secret lodes, and the Earth did not die; and to all who 
were lost in that darkness or wandered far from the light of the Valar the ear of 
Ulmo was ever open; nor has he ever forsaken Middle-earth, and whatsoever 
may since have befallen of ruin or of change he has not ceased to take thought 
for it, and will not until the end of days. 

And in that time of dark Yavanna also was unwilling utterly to forsake the 
Outer Lands; for all things that grow are dear to her, and she mourned for the 
works that she had begun in Middle-earth but Melkor had marred. Therefore 
leaving the house of Aule and the flowering meads of Valinor she would come at 
times and heal the hurts of Melkor; and returning she would ever urge the Valar 
to that war with his evil dominion that they must surely wage ere the coming of 
the Firstborn. And Orome tamer of beasts would ride too at whiles in the 
darkness of the unlit forests; as a mighty hunter he came with spear and bow, 
pursuing to the death the monsters and fell creatures of the kingdom of Melkor, 
and his white horse Nahar shone like silver in the shadows. Then the sleeping 
earth trembled at the beat of his golden hooves, and in the twilight of the world 
Orome would sound the Valaroma his great horn upon the plains of Arda; 
whereat the mountains echoed, and the shadows of evil fled away, and Melkor 
himself quailed in Utumno, foreboding the wrath to come. But even as Orome 
passed the servants of Melkor would gather again; and the lands were filled with 
shadows and deceit. 



Now all is said concerning the manner of the Earth and its rulers in the 
beginning of days, and ere the world became such as the Children of Iluvatar 
have known it. For Elves and Men are the Children of Iluvatar; and since they 
understood not fully that theme by which the Children entered into the Music, 
none of the Ainur dared to add anything to their fashion. For which reason the 
Valar are to these kindreds rather their elders and their chieftains than their 
masters; and if ever in their dealings with Elves and Men the Ainur have 
endeavoured to force them when they would not be guided, seldom has this 
turned to good, howsoever good the intent. The dealings of the Ainur have 
indeed been mostly with the Elves, for Iluvatar made them more like in nature to 
the Ainur, though less in might and stature; whereas to Men he gave strange 
gifts. 

For it is said that after the departure of the Valar there was silence, and for an 
age Iluvatar sat alone in thought. Then he spoke and said: ‘Behold I love the 
Earth, which shall be a mansion for the Quendi and the Atani! But the Quendi 
shall be the fairest of all earthly creatures, and they shall have and shall conceive 
and bring forth more beauty than all my Children; and they shall have the greater 
bliss in this world. But to the Atani I will give a new gift.’ Therefore he willed 
that the hearts of Men should seek beyond the world and should find no rest 
therein; but they should have a virtue to shape their life, amid the powers and 
chances of the world, beyond the Music of the Ainur, which is as fate to all 
things else; and of their operation everything should be, in form and deed, 
completed, and the world fulfilled unto the last and smallest. 

But Iluvatar knew that Men, being set amid the turmoils of the powers of the 
world, would stray often, and would not use their gifts in harmony; and he said, 
‘These too in their time shall find that all that they do redounds at the end only to 
the glory of my work.’ Yet the Elves believe that Men are often a grief to 
Manwe, who knows most of the mind of Iluvatar; for it seems to the Elves that 
Men resemble Melkor most of all the Ainur, although he has ever feared and 
hated them, even those that served him. 

It is one with this gift of freedom that the children of Men dwell only a short 
space in the world alive, and are not bound to it, and depart soon whither the 
Elves know not. Whereas the Elves remain until the end of days, and their love 
of the Earth and all the world is more single and more poignant therefore, and as 
the years lengthen ever more sorrowful. For the Elves die not till the world dies, 
unless they are slain or waste in grief (and to both these seeming deaths they are 
subject); neither does age subdue their strength, unless one grow weary of ten 
thousand centuries; and dying they are gathered to the halls of Mandos in 
Valinor, whence they may in time return. But the sons of Men die indeed, and 



leave the world; wherefore they are called the Guests, or the Strangers. Death is 
their fate, the gift of Iluvatar, which as Time wears even the Powers shall envy. 
But Melkor has cast his shadow upon it, and confounded it with darkness, and 
brought forth evil out of good, and fear out of hope. Yet of old the Valar declared 
to the Elves in Valinor that Men shall join in the Second Music of the Ainur; 
whereas Iluvatar has not revealed what he purposes for the Elves after the 
World’s end, and Melkor has not discovered it. 















CHAPTER 2 



OF AULE AND YAVANNA 


It is told that in their beginning the Dwarves were made by Aule in the darkness 
of Middle-earth; for so greatly did Aule desire the coming of the Children, to 
have learners to whom he could teach his lore and his crafts, that he was 
unwilling to await the fulfilment of the designs of Iluvatar. And Aule made the 
Dwarves even as they still are, because the forms of the Children who were to 
come were unclear to his mind, and because the power of Melkor was yet over 
the Earth; and he wished therefore that they should be strong and unyielding. But 
fearing that the other Valar might blame his work, he wrought in secret: and he 
made first the Seven Fathers of the Dwarves in a hall under the mountains in 
Middle-earth. 

Now Iluvatar knew what was done, and in the very hour that Aule’s work was 
complete, and he was pleased, and began to instruct the Dwarves in the speech 
that he had devised for them, Iluvatar spoke to him; and Aule heard his voice 
and was silent. And the voice of Iluvatar said to him: ‘Why hast thou done this? 
Why dost thou attempt a thing which thou knowest is beyond thy power and thy 
authority? For thou hast from me as a gift thy own being only, and no more; and 
therefore the creatures of thy hand and mind can live only by that being, moving 
when thou thinkest to move them, and if thy thought be elsewhere, standing idle. 
Is that thy desire?’ 

Then Aule answered: ‘I did not desire such lordship. I desired things other 
than I am, to love and to teach them, so that they too might perceive the beauty 
of Ea, which thou hast caused to be. For it seemed to me that there is great room 
in Arda for many things that might rejoice in it, yet it is for the most part empty 
still, and dumb. And in my impatience I have fallen into folly. Yet the making of 
things is in my heart from my own making by thee; and the child of little 
understanding that makes a play of the deeds of his father may do so without 
thought of mockery, but because he is the son of his father. But what shall I do 
now, so that thou be not angry with me for ever? As a child to his father, I offer 
to thee these things, the work of the hands which thou hast made. Do with them 
what thou wilt. But should I not rather destroy the work of my presumption?’ 

Then Aule took up a great hammer to smite the Dwarves; and he wept. But 
Iluvatar had compassion upon Aule and his desire, because of his humility; and 
the Dwarves shrank from the hammer and were afraid, and they bowed down 
their heads and begged for mercy. And the voice of Iluvatar said to Aule: ‘Thy 
offer I accepted even as it was made. Dost thou not see that these things have 
now a life of their own, and speak with their own voices? Else they would not 



have flinched from thy blow, nor from any command of thy will.’ Then Aule cast 
down his hammer and was glad, and he gave thanks to Iluvatar, saying: ‘May 
Eru bless my work and amend it! ’ 

But Iluvatar spoke again and said: ‘Even as I gave being to the thoughts of the 
Ainur at the beginning of the World, so now I have taken up thy desire and given 
to it a place therein; but in no other way will I amend thy handiwork, and as thou 
hast made it, so shall it be. But I will not suffer this: that these should come 
before the Firstborn of my design, nor that thy impatience should be rewarded. 
They shall sleep now in the darkness under stone, and shall not come forth until 
the Firstborn have awakened upon Earth; and until that time thou and they shall 
wait, though long it seem. But when the time comes I will awaken them, and 
they shall be to thee as children; and often strife shall arise between thine and 
mine, the children of my adoption and the children of my choice.’ 

Then Aule took the Seven Fathers of the Dwarves, and laid them to rest in far- 
sundered places; and he returned to Valinor, and waited while the long years 
lengthened. 

Since they were to come in the days of the power of Melkor, Aule made the 
Dwarves strong to endure. Therefore they are stone-hard, stubborn, fast in 
friendship and in enmity, and they suffer toil and hunger and hurt of body more 
hardily than all other speaking peoples; and they live long, far beyond the span 
of Men, yet not for ever. Aforetime it was held among the Elves in Middle-earth 
that dying the Dwarves returned to the earth and the stone of which they were 
made; yet that is not their own belief. For they say that Aule the Maker, whom 
they call Mahal, cares for them, and gathers them to Mandos in halls set apart; 
and that he declared to their Fathers of old that Iluvatar will hallow them and 
give them a place among the Children in the End. Then their part shall be to 
serve Aule and to aid him in the remaking of Arda after the East Battle. They say 
also that the Seven Fathers of the Dwarves return to live again in their own kin 
and to bear once more their ancient names: of whom Durin was the most 
renowned in after ages, father of that kindred most friendly to the Elves, whose 
mansions were at Khazad-dum. 


Now when Aule laboured in the making of the Dwarves he kept this work 
hidden from the other Valar; but at last he opened his mind to Yavanna and told 
her of all that had come to pass. Then Yavanna said to him: ‘Eru is merciful. 
Now I see that thy heart rejoiceth, as indeed it may; for thou hast received not 
only forgiveness but bounty. Yet because thou hiddest this thought from me until 
its achievement, thy children will have little love for the things of my love. They 



will love first the things made by their own hands, as doth their father. They will 
delve in the earth, and the things that grow and live upon the earth they will not 
heed. Many a tree shall feel the bite of their iron without pity.’ 

But Aule answered: ‘That shall also be true of the Children of Iluvatar; for 
they will eat and they will build. And though the things of thy realm have worth 
in themselves, and would have worth if no Children were to come, yet Eru will 
give them dominion, and they shall use all that they find in Arda: though not, by 
the purpose of Eru, without respect or without gratitude . 5 

‘Not unless Melkor darken their hearts , 5 said Yavanna. And she was not 
appeased, but grieved in heart, fearing what might be done upon Middle-earth in 
days to come. Therefore she went before Manwe, and she did not betray the 
counsel of Aule, but she said: ‘King of Arda, is it true, as Aule hath said to me, 
that the Children when they come shall have dominion over all the things of my 
labour, to do as they will therewith ? 5 

‘It is true , 5 said Manwe. ‘But why dost thou ask, for thou hadst no need of the 
teaching of Aule ? 5 

Then Yavanna was silent and looked into her own thought. And she answered: 
‘Because my heart is anxious, thinking of the days to come. All my works are 
dear to me. Is it not enough that Melkor should have marred so many? Shall 
nothing that I have devised be free from the dominion of others ? 5 

‘If thou hadst thy will what wouldst thou reserve ? 5 said Manwe. ‘Of all thy 
realm what dost thou hold dearest ? 5 

‘All have their worth , 5 said Yavanna, ‘and each contributes to the worth of the 
others. But the kelvar can flee or defend themselves, whereas the olvar that grow 
cannot. And among these I hold trees dear. Long in the growing, swift shall they 
be in the felling, and unless they pay toll with fruit upon bough little mourned in 
their passing. So I see in my thought. Would that the trees might speak on behalf 
of all things that have roots, and punish those that wrong them ! 5 

‘This is a strange thought , 5 said Manwe. 

‘Yet it was in the Song , 5 said Yavanna. ‘For while thou wert in the heavens 
and with Ulmo built the clouds and poured out the rains, I lifted up the branches 
of great trees to receive them, and some sang to Iluvatar amid the wind and the 
rain . 5 

Then Manwe sat silent, and the thought of Yavanna that she had put into his 
heart grew and unfolded; and it was beheld by Iluvatar. Then it seemed to 
Manwe that the Song rose once more about him, and he heeded now many 
things therein that though he had heard them he had not heeded before. And at 
last the Vision was renewed, but it was not now remote, for he was himself 
within it, and yet he saw that all was upheld by the hand of Iluvatar; and the 



hand entered in, and from it came forth many wonders that had until then been 
hidden from him in the hearts of the Ainur. 

Then Manwe awoke, and he went down to Yavanna upon Ezellohar, and he sat 
beside her beneath the Two Trees. And Manwe said: 'O Kementari, Eru hath 
spoken, saying: “Do then any of the Valar suppose that I did not hear all the 
Song, even the least sound of the least voice? Behold! When the Children 
awake, then the thought of Yavanna will awake also, and it will summon spirits 
from afar, and they will go among the kelvar and the o/var, and some will dwell 
therein, and be held in reverence, and their just anger shall be feared. For a time: 
while the Firstborn are in their power, and while the Secondborn are young.” But 
dost thou not now remember, Kementari, that thy thought sang not always alone? 
Did not thy thought and mine meet also, so that we took wing together like great 
birds that soar above the clouds? That also shall come to be by the heed of 
Iluvatar, and before the Children awake there shall go forth with wings like the 
wind the Eagles of the Lords of the West? 

Then Yavanna was glad, and she stood up, reaching her arms towards the 
heavens, and she said: 'High shall climb the trees of Kementari, that the Eagles 
of the King may house therein ! 5 

But Manwe rose also, and it seemed that he stood to such a height that his 
voice came down to Yavanna as from the paths of the winds. 

‘Nay? he said, 'only the trees of Aule will be tall enough. In the mountains the 
Eagles shall house, and hear the voices of those who call upon us. But in the 
forests shall walk the Shepherds of the Trees? 

Then Manwe and Yavanna parted for that time, and Yavanna returned to Aule; 
and he was in his smithy, pouring molten metal into a mould. 'Eru is bountiful? 
she said. ‘Now let thy children beware! For there shall walk a power in the 
forests whose wrath they will arouse at their peril? 

‘Nonetheless they will have need of wood? said Aule, and he went on with his 
smith-work. 










CHAPTER 3 



OF THE COMING OF THE ELVES AND THE CAPTIVITY OF 

MELKOR 


Through long ages the Valar dwelt in bliss in the light of the Trees beyond the 
Mountains of Aman, but all Middle-earth lay in a twilight under the stars. While 
the Lamps had shone, growth began there which now was checked, because all 
was again dark. But already the oldest living things had arisen: in the seas the 
great weeds, and on earth the shadow of great trees; and in the valleys of the 
night-clad hills there were dark creatures old and strong. To those lands and 
forests the Valar seldom came, save only Yavanna and Orome; and Yavanna 
would walk there in the shadows, grieving because the growth and promise of 
the Spring of Arda was stayed. And she set a sleep upon many things that had 
arisen in the Spring, so that they should not age, but should wait for a time of 
awakening that yet should be. 

But in the north Melkor built his strength, and he slept not, but watched, and 
laboured; and the evil things that he had perverted walked abroad, and the dark 
and slumbering woods were haunted by monsters and shapes of dread. And in 
Utumno he gathered his demons about him, those spirits who first adhered to 
him in the days of his splendour, and became most like him in his corruption: 
their hearts were of fire, but they were cloaked in darkness, and terror went 
before them; they had whips of flame. Balrogs they were named in Middle-earth 
in later days. And in that dark time Melkor bred many other monsters of divers 
shapes and kinds that long troubled the world; and his realm spread now ever 
southward over Middle-earth. 

And Melkor made also a fortress and armoury not far from the north-western 
shores of the sea, to resist any assault that might come from Aman. That 
stronghold was commanded by Sauron, lieutenant of Melkor; and it was named 
Angband. 


It came to pass that the Valar held council, for they became troubled by the 
tidings that Yavanna and Orome brought from the Outer Lands; and Yavanna 
spoke before the Valar, saying: ‘Ye mighty of Arda, the Vision of Iluvatar was 
brief and soon taken away, so that maybe we cannot guess within a narrow count 
of days the hour appointed. Yet be sure of this: the hour approaches, and within 
this age our hope shall be revealed, and the Children shall awake. Shall we then 
leave the lands of their dwelling desolate and full of evil? Shall they walk in 
darkness while we have light? Shall they call Melkor lord while Manwe sits 




upon Taniquetil?’ 

And Tulkas cried: 'Nay! Let us make war swiftly! Have we not rested from 
strife overlong, and is not our strength now renewed? Shall one alone contest 
with us for ever?’ 

But at the bidding of Manwe Mandos spoke, and he said: ‘In this age the 
Children of Iluvatar shall come indeed, but they come not yet. Moreover it is 
doom that the Firstborn shall come in the darkness, and shall look first upon the 
stars. Great light shall be for their waning. To Varda ever shall they call at need? 

Then Varda went forth from the council, and she looked out from the height of 
Taniquetil, and beheld the darkness of Middle-earth beneath the innumerable 
stars, faint and far. Then she began a great labour, greatest of all the works of the 
Valar since their coming into Arda. She took the silver dews from the vats of 
Telperion, and therewith she made new stars and brighter against the coming of 
the Firstborn; wherefore she whose name out of the deeps of time and the 
labours of Ea was Tintalle, the Kindler, was called after by the Elves Elentari, 
Queen of the Stars. Carnil and Luinil, Nenar and Lumbar, Alcarinque and 
Elemmire she wrought in that time, and many other of the ancient stars she 
gathered together and set as signs in the heavens of Arda: Wilwarin, Telumendil, 
Soronume, and Anarrima; and Menelmacar with his shining belt, that forebodes 
the Last Battle that shall be at the end of days. And high in the north as a 
challenge to Melkor she set the crown of seven mighty stars to swing, Valacirca, 
the Sickle of the Valar and sign of doom. 

It is told that even as Varda ended her labours, and they were long, when first 
Menelmacar strode up the sky and the blue fire of Helluin flickered in the mists 
above the borders of the world, in that hour the Children of the Earth awoke, the 
Firstborn of Iluvatar. By the starlit mere of Cuivienen, Water of Awakening, they 
rose from the sleep of Iluvatar; and while they dwelt yet silent by Cuivienen 
their eyes beheld first of all things the stars of heaven. Therefore they have ever 
loved the starlight, and have revered Varda Elentari above all the Valar. 

In the changes of the world the shapes of lands and of seas have been broken 
and remade; rivers have not kept their courses, neither have mountains remained 
steadfast; and to Cuivienen there is no returning. But it is said among the Elves 
that it lay far off in the east of Middle-earth, and northward, and it was a bay in 
the Inland Sea of Helcar; and that sea stood where aforetime the roots of the 
mountain of Illuin had been before Melkor overthrew it. Many waters flowed 
down thither from heights in the east, and the first sound that was heard by the 
Elves was the sound of water flowing, and the sound of water falling over stone. 

Long they dwelt in their first home by the water under stars, and they walked 
the Earth in wonder; and they began to make speech and to give names to all 



things that they perceived. Themselves they named the Quendi, signifying those 
that speak with voices; for as yet they had met no other living things that spoke 
or sang. 

And on a time it chanced that Orome rode eastward in his hunting, and he 
turned north by the shores of Helcar and passed under the shadows of the 
Orocarni, the Mountains of the East. Then on a sudden Nahar set up a great 
neighing, and stood still. And Orome wondered and sat silent, and it seemed to 
him that in the quiet of the land under the stars he heard afar off many voices 
singing. 

Thus it was that the Valar found at last, as it were by chance, those whom they 
had so long awaited. And Orome looking upon the Elves was filled with wonder, 
as though they were beings sudden and marvellous and unforeseen; for so it shall 
ever be with the Valar. From without the World, though all things may be 
forethought in music or foreshown in vision from afar, to those who enter verily 
into Ea each in its time shall be met at unawares as something new and 
unforetold. 

In the beginning the Elder Children of Iluvatar were stronger and greater than 
they have since become; but not more fair, for though the beauty of the Quendi 
in the days of their youth was beyond all other beauty that Iluvatar has caused to 
be, it has not perished, but lives in the West, and sorrow and wisdom have 
enriched it. And Orome loved the Quendi, and named them in their own tongue 
Eldar, the people of the stars; but that name was after borne only by those who 
followed him upon the westward road. 

Yet many of the Quendi were filled with dread at his coming; and this was the 
doing of Melkor. For by after-knowledge the wise declare that Melkor, ever 
watchful, was first aware of the awakening of the Quendi, and sent shadows and 
evil spirits to spy upon them and waylay them. So it came to pass, some years 
ere the coming of Orome, that if any of the Elves strayed far abroad, alone or 
few together, they would often vanish, and never return; and the Quendi said that 
the Hunter had caught them, and they were afraid. And indeed the most ancient 
songs of the Elves, of which echoes are remembered still in the West, tell of the 
shadow-shapes that walked in the hills above Cuivienen, or would pass suddenly 
over the stars; and of the dark Rider upon his wild horse that pursued those that 
wandered to take them and devour them. Now Melkor greatly hated and feared 
the riding of Orome, and either he sent indeed his dark servants as riders, or he 
set lying whispers abroad, for the purpose that the Quendi should shun Orome, if 
ever they should meet. 

Thus it was that when Nahar neighed and Orome indeed came among them, 
some of the Quendi hid themselves, and some fled and were lost. But those that 



had courage, and stayed, perceived swiftly that the Great Rider was no shape out 
of darkness; for the light of Aman was in his face, and all the noblest of the 
Elves were drawn towards it. 

But of those unhappy ones who were ensnared by Melkor little is known of a 
certainty. For who of the living has descended into the pits of Utumno, or has 
explored the darkness of the counsels of Melkor? Yet this is held true by the wise 
of Eressea, that all those of the Quendi who came into the hands of Melkor, ere 
Utumno was broken, were put there in prison, and by slow arts of cruelty were 
corrupted and enslaved; and thus did Melkor breed the hideous race of the Ores 
in envy and mockery of the Elves, of whom they were afterwards the bitterest 
foes. For the Ores had life and multiplied after the manner of the Children of 
Iluvatar; and naught that had life of its own, nor the semblance of life, could ever 
Melkor make since his rebellion in the Ainulindale before the Beginning: so say 
the wise. And deep in their dark hearts the Ores loathed the Master whom they 
served in fear, the maker only of their misery. This it may be was the vilest deed 
of Melkor, and the most hateful to Iluvatar. 


Orome tarried a while among the Quendi, and then swiftly he rode back over 
land and sea to Valinor and brought the tidings to Valmar; and he spoke of the 
shadows that troubled Cuivienen. Then the Valar rejoiced, and yet they were in 
doubt amid their joy; and they debated long what counsel it were best to take for 
the guarding of the Quendi from the shadow of Melkor. But Orome returned at 
once to Middle-earth and abode with the Elves. 

Manwe sat long in thought upon Taniquetil, and he sought the counsel of 
Iluvatar. And coming then down to Valmar he summoned the Valar to the Ring 
of Doom, and thither came even Ulmo from the Outer Sea. 

Then Manwe said to the Valar: ‘This is the counsel of Iluvatar in my heart: 
that we should take up again the mastery of Arda, at whatsoever cost, and deliver 
the Quendi from the shadow of Melkor? Then Tulkas was glad; but Aule was 
grieved, foreboding the hurts of the world that must come of that strife. But the 
Valar made ready and came forth from Aman in strength of war, resolving to 
assault the fortresses of Melkor and make an end. Never did Melkor forget that 
this war was made for the sake of the Elves, and that they were the cause of his 
downfall. Yet they had no part in those deeds, and they know little of the riding 
of the might of the West against the North in the beginning of their days. 

Melkor met the onset of the Valar in the North-west of Middle-earth, and all 
that region was much broken. But the first victory of the hosts of the West was 
swift, and the servants of Melkor fled before them to Utumno. Then the Valar 



passed over Middle-earth, and they set a guard over Cuivienen; and thereafter 
the Quendi knew nothing of the great Battle of the Powers, save that the Earth 
shook and groaned beneath them, and the waters were moved, and in the north 
there were lights as of mighty fires. Long and grievous was the siege of Utumno, 
and many battles were fought before its gates of which naught but the rumour is 
known to the Elves. In that time the shape of Middle-earth was changed, and the 
Great Sea that sundered it from Aman grew wide and deep; and it broke in upon 
the coasts and made a deep gulf to the southward. Many lesser bays were made 
between the Great Gulf and Helcaraxe far in the north, where Middle-earth and 
Aman came nigh together. Of these the Bay of Balar was the chief; and into it 
the mighty river Sirion flowed down from the new-raised highlands northwards: 
Dorthonion, and the mountains about Hithlum. The lands of the far north were 
all made desolate in those days; for there Utumno was delved exceeding deep, 
and its pits were filled with fires and with great hosts of the servants of Melkor. 

But at the last the gates of Utumno were broken and the halls unroofed, and 
Melkor took refuge in the uttermost pit. Then Tulkas stood forth as champion of 
the Valar and wrestled with him, and cast him upon his face; and he was bound 
with the chain Angainor that Aule had wrought, and led captive; and the world 
had peace for a long age. 

Nonetheless the Valar did not discover all the mighty vaults and caverns 
hidden with deceit far under the fortresses of Angband and Utumno. Many evil 
things still lingered there, and others were dispersed and fled into the dark and 
roamed in the waste places of the world, awaiting a more evil hour; and Sauron 
they did not find. 

But when the Battle was ended and from the ruin of the North great clouds 
arose and hid the stars, the Valar drew Melkor back to Valinor, bound hand and 
foot, and blindfold; and he was brought to the Ring of Doom. There he lay upon 
his face before the feet of Manwe and sued for pardon; but his prayer was 
denied, and he was cast into prison in the fastness of Mandos, whence none can 
escape, neither Vala, nor Elf, nor mortal Man. Vast and strong are those halls, 
and they were built in the west of the land of Aman. There was Melkor doomed 
to abide for three ages long, before his cause should be tried anew, or he should 
plead again for pardon. 

Then again the Valar were gathered in council, and they were divided in 
debate. For some, and of those Ulmo was the chief, held that the Quendi should 
be left free to walk as they would in Middle-earth, and with their gifts of skill to 
order all the lands and heal their hurts. But the most part feared for the Quendi in 
the dangerous world amid the deceits of the starlit dusk; and they were filled 
moreover with the love of the beauty of the Elves and desired their fellowship. 



At the last, therefore, the Valar summoned the Quendi to Valinor, there to be 
gathered at the knees of the Powers in the light of the Trees for ever; and 
Mandos broke his silence, saying: ‘So it is doomed.’ From this summons came 
many woes that afterwards befell. 

But the Elves were at first unwilling to hearken to the summons, for they had 
as yet seen the Valar only in their wrath as they went to war, save Orome alone; 
and they were filled with dread. Therefore Orome was sent again to them, and he 
chose from among them ambassadors who should go to Valinor and speak for 
their people; and these were Ingwe, Finwe, and Elwe, who afterwards were 
kings. And coming they were filled with awe by the glory and majesty of the 
Valar, and desired greatly the light and splendour of the Trees. Then Orome 
brought them back to Cuivienen, and they spoke before their people, and 
counselled them to heed the summons of the Valar and remove into the West. 

Then befell the first sundering of the Elves. For the kindred of Ingwe, and the 
most part of the kindreds of Finwe and Elwe, were swayed by the words of their 
lords, and were willing to depart and follow Orome: and these were known ever 
after as the Eldar, by the name that Orome gave to the Elves in the beginning, in 
their own tongue. But many refused the summons, preferring the starlight and 
the wide spaces of Middle-earth to the rumour of the Trees; and these are the 
Avari, the Unwilling, and they were sundered in that time from the Eldar, and 
met never again until many ages were past. 

The Eldar prepared now a great march from their first homes in the east; and 
they were arrayed in three hosts. The smallest host and the first to set forth was 
led by Ingwe, the most high lord of all the Elvish race. He entered into Valinor 
and sits at the feet of the Powers, and all Elves revere his name; but he came 
never back, nor looked again upon Middle-earth. The Vanyar were his people; 
they are the Fair Elves, the beloved of Manwe and Varda, and few among Men 
have spoken with them. 

Next came the Noldor, a name of wisdom, the people of Finwe. They are the 
Deep Elves, the friends of Aule; and they are renowned in song, for they fought 
and laboured long and grievously in the northern lands of old. 

The greatest host came last, and they are named the Teleri, for they tarried on 
the road, and were not wholly of a mind to pass from the dusk to the light of 
Valinor. In water they had great delight, and those that came at last to the 
western shores were enamoured of the sea. The Sea-elves therefore they became 
in the land of Aman, the Falmari, for they made music beside the breaking 
waves. Two lords they had, for their numbers were great: Elwe Singollo (which 
signifies Greymantle) and Olwe his brother. 

These were the three kindreds of the Eldalie, who passing at length into the 



uttermost West in the days of the Trees are called the Calaquendi, Elves of the 
Light. But others of the Eldar there were who set out indeed upon the westward 
march, but became lost upon the long road, or turned aside, or lingered on the 
shores of Middle-earth; and these were for the most part of the kindred of the 
Teleri, as is told hereafter. They dwelt by the sea, or wandered in the woods and 
mountains of the world, yet their hearts were turned towards the West. Those 
Elves the Calaquendi call the Umanyar, since they came never to the land of 
Aman and the Blessed Realm; but the Umanyar and the Avari alike they call the 
Moriquendi, Elves of the Darkness, for they never beheld the Light that was 
before the Sun and Moon. 


It is told that when the hosts of the Eldalie departed from Cuivienen Orome 
rode at their head upon Nahar, his white horse shod with gold; and passing 
northward about the Sea of Helcar they turned towards the west. Before them 
great clouds hung still black in the North above the ruins of war, and the stars in 
that region were hidden. Then not a few grew afraid and repented, and turned 
back, and are forgotten. 

Long and slow was the march of the Eldar into the west, for the leagues of 
Middle-earth were uncounted, and weary and pathless. Nor did the Eldar desire 
to hasten, for they were filled with wonder at all that they saw, and by many 
lands and rivers they wished to abide; and though all were yet willing to wander, 
many feared rather their journey’s end than hoped for it. Therefore whenever 
Orome departed, having at times other matters to heed, they halted and went 
forward no more, until he returned to guide them. And it came to pass after 
many years of journeying in this manner that the Eldar took their course through 
a forest, and they came to a great river, wider than any they had yet seen; and 
beyond it were mountains whose sharp horns seemed to pierce the realm of the 
stars. This river, it is said, was even the river which was after called Anduin the 
Great, and was ever the frontier of the west-lands of Middle-earth. But the 
mountains were the Hithaeglir, the Towers of Mist upon the borders of Eriador; 
yet they were taller and more terrible in those days, and were reared by Melkor 
to hinder the riding of Orome. Now the Teleri abode long on the east bank of that 
river and wished to remain there, but the Vanyar and the Noldor passed over it, 
and Orome led them into the passes of the mountains. And when Orome was 
gone forward the Teleri looked upon the shadowy heights and were afraid. 

Then one arose in the host of Olwe, which was ever the hindmost on the road; 
Lenwe he was called. He forsook the westward march, and led away a numerous 
people, southwards down the great river, and they passed out of the knowledge 



of their kin until long years were past. Those were the Nandor; and they became 
a people apart, unlike their kin, save that they loved water, and dwelt most 
beside falls and running streams. Greater knowledge they had of living things, 
tree and herb, bird and beast, than all other Elves. In after years Denethor, son of 
Lenwe, turned again west at last, and led a part of that people over the mountains 
into Beleriand ere the rising of the Moon. 


At length the Vanyar and the Noldor came over Ered Luin, the Blue 
Mountains, between Eriador and the westernmost land of Middle-earth, which 
the Elves after named Beleriand; and the foremost companies passed over the 
Vale of Sirion and came down to the shores of the Great Sea between Drengist 
and the Bay of Balar. But when they beheld it great fear came upon them, and 
many withdrew into the woods and highlands of Beleriand. Then Orome 
departed, and returned to Valinor to seek the counsel of Manwe, and left them. 

And the host of the Teleri passed over the Misty Mountains, and crossed the 
wide lands of Eriador, being urged on by Elwe Singollo, for he was eager to 
return to Valinor and the Light that he had beheld; and he wished not to be 
sundered from the Noldor, for he had great friendship with Finwe their lord. 
Thus after many years the Teleri also came at last over Ered Luin into the eastern 
regions of Beleriand. There they halted, and dwelt a while beyond the River 
Gelion. 





CHAPTER 4 



OF THINGOL AND MELIAN 


Melian was a Maia, of the race of the Valar. She dwelt in the gardens of Lorien, 
and among all his people there were none more beautiful than Melian, nor more 
wise, nor more skilled in songs of enchantment. It is told that the Valar would 
leave their works, and the birds of Valinor their mirth, that the bells of Valmar 
were silent and the fountains ceased to flow, when at the mingling of the lights 
Melian sang in Lorien. Nightingales went always with her, and she taught them 
their song; and she loved the deep shadows of the great trees. She was akin 
before the World was made to Yavanna herself; and in that time when the 
Quendi awoke beside the waters of Cuivienen she departed from Valinor and 
came to the Hither Lands, and there she filled the silence of Middle-earth before 
the dawn with her voice and the voices of her birds. 

Now when their journey was near its end, as has been told, the people of the 
Teleri rested long in East Beleriand, beyond the River Gelion; and at that time 
many of the Noldor still lay to the westward, in those forests that were 
afterwards named Neldoreth and Region. Elwe, lord of the Teleri, went often 
through the great woods to seek out Finwe his friend in the dwellings of the 
Noldor; and it chanced on a time that he came alone to the starlit wood of Nan 
Elmoth, and there suddenly he heard the song of nightingales. Then an 
enchantment fell on him, and he stood still; and afar off beyond the voices of the 
lomelindi he heard the voice of Melian, and it filled all his heart with wonder and 
desire. He forgot then utterly all his people and all the purposes of his mind, and 
following the birds under the shadow of the trees he passed deep into Nan 
Elmoth and was lost. But he came at last to a glade open to the stars, and there 
Melian stood; and out of the darkness he looked at her, and the light of Aman 
was in her face. 

She spoke no word; but being filled with love Elwe came to her and took her 
hand, and straightway a spell was laid on him, so that they stood thus while long 
years were measured by the wheeling stars above them; and the trees of Nan 
Elmoth grew tall and dark before they spoke any word. 

Thus Elwe’s folk who sought him found him not, and Olwe took the kingship 
of the Teleri and departed, as is told hereafter. Elwe Singollo came never again 
across the sea to Valinor so long as he lived, and Melian returned not thither 
while their realm together lasted; but of her there came among both Elves and 
Men a strain of the Ainur who were with Iluvatar before Ea. In after days he 
became a king renowned, and his people were all the Eldar of Beleriand; the 
Sindar they were named, the Grey-elves, the Elves of the Twilight, and King 



Greymantle was he, Elu Thingol in the tongue of that land. And Melian was his 
Queen, wiser than any child of Middle-earth; and their hidden halls were in 
Menegroth, the Thousand Caves, in Doriath. Great power Melian lent to 
Thingol, who was himself great among the Eldar; for he alone of all the Sindar 
had seen with his own eyes the Trees in the day of their flowering, and king 
though he was of Umanyar, he was not accounted among the Moriquendi, but 
with the Elves of the Light, mighty upon Middle-earth. And of the love of 
Thingol and Melian there came into the world the fairest of all the Children of 
Iluvatar that was or shall ever be. 



CHAPTER 5 



OF ELDAMAR AND THE PRINCES OF THE ELDALIE 


In time the hosts of the Vanyar and the Noldor came to the last western shores of 
the Hither Lands. In the north these shores, in the ancient days after the Battle of 
the Powers, bent ever westward, until in the northernmost parts of Arda only a 
narrow sea divided Aman, upon which Valinor was built, from the Hither Lands; 
but this narrow sea was filled with grinding ice, because of the violence of the 
frosts of Melkor. Therefore Orome did not lead the hosts of the Eldalie into the 
far north, but brought them to the fair lands about the River Sirion, that 
afterwards were named Beleriand; and from those shores whence first the Eldar 
looked in fear and wonder on the Sea there stretched an ocean, wide and dark 
and deep, between them and the Mountains of Aman. 

Now Ulmo, by the counsel of the Valar, came to the shores of Middle-earth 
and spoke with the Eldar who waited there, gazing on the dark waves; and 
because of his words and the music which he made for them on his horns of shell 
their fear of the sea was turned rather to desire. Therefore Ulmo uprooted an 
island which long had stood alone amid the sea, far from either shore, since the 
tumults of the fall of Illuin; and with the aid of his servants he moved it, as it 
were a mighty ship, and anchored it in the Bay of Balar, into which Sirion 
poured his water. Then the Vanyar and the Noldor embarked upon that isle, and 
were drawn over the sea, and came at last to the long shores beneath the 
Mountains of Aman; and they entered Valinor and were welcomed to its bliss. 
But the eastern horn of the island, which was deep-grounded in the shoals off the 
mouths of Sirion, was broken asunder and remained behind; and that, it is said, 
was the Isle of Balar, to which afterwards Osse often came. 

But the Teleri remained still in Middle-earth, for they dwelt in East Beleriand 
far from the sea, and they heard not the summons of Ulmo until too late; and 
many searched still for Elwe their lord, and without him they were unwilling to 
depart. But when they learned that Ingwe and Finwe and their peoples were 
gone, then many of the Teleri pressed on to the shores of Beleriand, and dwelt 
thereafter near the Mouths of Sirion, in longing for their friends that had 
departed; and they took Olwe, Elwe’s brother, to be their king. Long they 
remained by the coasts of the western sea, and Osse and Uinen came to them and 
befriended them; and Osse instructed them, sitting upon a rock near to the 
margin of the land, and of him they learned all manner of sea-lore and sea- 
music. Thus it came to be that the Teleri, who were from the beginning lovers of 
water, and the fairest singers of all the Elves, were after enamoured of the seas, 
and their songs were filled with the sound of waves upon the shore. 



When many years had passed, Ulmo hearkened to the prayers of the Noldor 
and of Finwe their king, who grieved at their long sundering from the Teleri, and 
besought him to bring them to Aman, if they would come. And most of them 
proved now willing indeed; but great was the grief of Osse when Ulmo returned 
to the coasts of Beleriand, to bear them away to Valinor; for his care was for the 
seas of Middle-earth and the shores of the Hither Lands, and he was ill-pleased 
that the voices of the Teleri should be heard no more in his domain. Some he 
persuaded to remain; and those were the Falathrim, the Elves of the Falas, who 
in after days had dwellings at the havens of Brithombar and E glare st, the first 
mariners in Middle-earth and the first makers of ships. Cirdan the Shipwright 
was their lord. 

The kinsfolk and friends of Elwe Singollo also remained in the Hither Lands, 
seeking him yet, though they would fain have departed to Valinor and the light 
of the Trees, if Ulmo and Olwe had been willing to tarry longer. But Olwe would 
be gone; and at last the main host of the Teleri embarked upon the isle, and Ulmo 
drew them far away. Then the friends of Elwe were left behind; and they called 
themselves Eglath, the Forsaken People. They dwelt in the woods and hills of 
Beleriand, rather than by the sea, which filled them with sorrow; but the desire 
of Aman was ever in their hearts. 

But when Elwe awoke from his long trance, he came forth from Nan Elmoth 
with Melian, and they dwelt thereafter in the woods in the midst of the land. 
Greatly though he had desired to see again the light of the Trees, in the face of 
Melian he beheld the light of Aman as in an unclouded mirror, and in that light 
he was content. His people gathered about him in joy, and they were amazed; for 
fair and noble as he had been, now he appeared as it were a lord of the Maiar, his 
hair as grey silver, tallest of all the Children of Iluvatar; and a high doom was 
before him. 







Now Osse followed after the host of Olwe, and when they were come to the 
Bay of Eldamar (which is Elvenhome) he called to them; and they knew his 
voice, and begged Ulmo to stay their voyage. And Ulmo granted their request, 
and at his bidding Osse made fast the island and rooted it to the foundations of 
the sea. Ulmo did this the more readily, for he understood the hearts of the 
Teleri, and in the council of the Valar he had spoken against the summons, 
thinking that it were better for the Quendi to remain in Middle-earth. The Valar 
were little pleased to learn what he had done; and Finwe grieved when the Teleri 
came not, and yet more when he learned that Elwe was forsaken, and knew that 
he should not see him again, unless it were in the halls of Mandos. But the island 
was not moved again, and stood there alone in the Bay of Eldamar; and it was 
called Tol Eressea, the Lonely Isle. There the Teleri abode as they wished under 
the stars of heaven, and yet within sight of Aman and the deathless shore; and by 
that long sojourn apart in the Lonely Isle was caused the sundering of their 
speech from that of the Vanyar and the Noldor. 

To these the Valar had given a land and a dwelling-place. Even among the 
radiant flowers of the Tree-lit gardens of Valinor they longed still at times to see 
the stars; and therefore a gap was made in the great walls of the Pelori, and there 
in a deep valley that ran down to the sea the Eldar raised a high green hill: Tuna 
it was called. From the west the light of the Trees fell upon it, and its shadow lay 
ever eastward; and to the east it looked towards the Bay of Elvenhome, and the 
Lonely Isle, and the Shadowy Seas. Then through the Calacirya, the Pass of 
Light, the radiance of the Blessed Realm streamed forth, kindling the dark waves 
to silver and gold, and it touched the Lonely Isle, and its western shore grew 
green and fair. There bloomed the first flowers that ever were east of the 
Mountains of Aman. 

Upon the crown of Tuna the city of the Elves was built, the white walls and 
terraces of Tirion; and the highest of the towers of that city was the Tower of 
Ingwe, Mindon Eldalieva, whose silver lamp shone far out into the mists of the 
sea. Few are the ships of mortal Men that have seen its slender beam. In Tirion 
upon Tuna the Vanyar and the Noldor dwelt long in fellowship. And since of all 
things in Valinor they loved most the White Tree, Yavanna made for them a tree 
like to a lesser image of Telperion, save that it did not give light of its own 
being; Galathilion it was named in the Sindarin tongue. This tree was planted in 
the courts beneath the Mindon and there flourished, and its seedlings were many 
in Eldamar. Of these one was afterwards planted in Tol Eressea, and it prospered 



there, and was named Celeborn; thence came in the fullness of time, as is 
elsewhere told, Nimloth, the White Tree of Numenor. 

Manwe and Varda loved most the Vanyar, the Fair Elves; but the Noldor were 
beloved of Aule, and he and his people came often among them. Great became 
their knowledge and their skill; yet even greater was their thirst for more 
knowledge, and in many things they soon surpassed their teachers. They were 
changeful in speech, for they had great love of words, and sought ever to find 
names more fit for all things that they knew or imagined. And it came to pass 
that the masons of the house of Finwe, quarrying in the hills after stone (for they 
delighted in the building of high towers), first discovered the earth-gems, and 
brought them forth in countless myriads; and they devised tools for the cutting 
and shaping of gems, and carved them in many forms. They hoarded them not, 
but gave them freely, and by their labour enriched all Valinor. 

The Noldor afterwards came back to Middle-earth, and this tale tells mostly of 
their deeds; therefore the names and kinship of their princes may here be told, in 
that form which these names later bore in the tongue of the Elves of Beleriand. 

Finwe was King of the Noldor. The sons of Finwe were Feanor, and Fingolfin, 
and Finarfin; but the mother of Feanor was Miriel Serinde, whereas the mother 
of Fingolfin and Finarfin was Indis of the Vanyar. 

Feanor was the mightiest in skill of word and of hand, more learned than his 
brothers; his spirit burned as a flame. Fingolfin was the strongest, the most 
steadfast, and the most valiant. Finarfin was the fairest, and the most wise of 
heart; and afterwards he was a friend of the sons of Olwe, lord of the Teleri, and 
had to wife Earwen, the swan-maiden of Alqualonde, Olwe’s daughter. 

The seven sons of Feanor were Maedhros the tall; Maglor the mighty singer, 
whose voice was heard far over land and sea; Celegorm the fair, and Caranthir 
the dark; Curufin the crafty, who inherited most his father’s skill of hand; and the 
youngest Amrod and Amras, who were twin brothers, alike in mood and face. In 
later days they were great hunters in the woods of Middle-earth; and a hunter 
also was Celegorm, who in Valinor was a friend of Orome, and often followed 
the Vala’s horn. 

The sons of Fingolfin were Fingon, who was afterwards King of the Noldor in 
the north of the world, and Turgon, lord of Gondolin; their sister was Aredhel the 
White. She was younger in the years of the Eldar than her brothers; and when 
she was grown to full stature and beauty she was tall and strong, and loved much 
to ride and hunt in the forests. There she was often in the company of the sons of 
Feanor, her kin; but to none was her heart’s love given. Ar-Feiniel she was 
called, the White Lady of the Noldor, for she was pale, though her hair was dark, 
and she was never arrayed but in silver and white. 



The sons of Finarfin were Finrod the faithful (who was afterwards named 
Felagund, Lord of Caves), Orodreth, Angrod, and Aegnor; these four were as 
close in friendship with the sons of Fingolfin as though they were all brothers. A 
sister they had, Galadriel, most beautiful of all the house of Finwe; her hair was 
lit with gold as though it had caught in a mesh the radiance of Laurelin. 


Here must be told how the Teleri came at last to the land of Aman. Through a 
long age they dwelt in Tol Eressea; but slowly their hearts were changed, and 
were drawn towards the light that flowed out over the sea to the Lonely Isle. 
They were torn between the love of the music of the waves upon their shores, 
and the desire to see again their kindred and to look upon the splendour of 
Valinor; but in the end desire of the light was the stronger. Therefore Ulmo, 
submitting to the will of the Valar, sent to them Osse, their friend, and he though 
grieving taught them the craft of ship-building; and when their ships were built 
he brought them as his parting gift many strong-winged swans. Then the swans 
drew the white ships of the Teleri over the windless sea; and thus at last and 
latest they came to Aman and the shores of Eldamar. 

There they dwelt, and if they wished they could see the light of the Trees, and 
could tread the golden streets of Valmar and the crystal stairs of Tirion upon 
Tuna, the green hill; but most of all they sailed in their swift ships on the waters 
of the Bay of Elvenhome, or walked in the waves upon the shore with their hair 
gleaming in the light beyond the hill. Many jewels the Noldor gave them, opals 
and diamonds and pale crystals, which they strewed upon the shores and 
scattered in the pools; marvellous were the beaches of Elende in those days. And 
many pearls they won for themselves from the sea, and their halls were of pearl, 
and of pearl were the mansions of Olwe at Alqualonde, the Haven of the Swans, 
lit with many lamps. For that was their city, and the haven of their ships; and 
those were made in the likeness of swans, with beaks of gold and eyes of gold 
and jet. The gate of that harbour was an arch of living rock sea-carved; and it lay 
upon the confines of Eldamar, north of the Calacirya, where the light of the stars 
was bright and clear. 


As the ages passed the Vanyar grew to love the land of the Valar and the full 
light of the Trees, and they forsook the city of Tirion upon Tuna, and dwelt 
thereafter upon the mountain of Manwe, or about the plains and woods of 
Valinor, and became sundered from the Noldor. But the memory of Middle-earth 
under the stars remained in the hearts of the Noldor, and they abode in the 



Calacirya, and in the hills and valleys within sound of the western sea; and 
though many of them went often about the land of the Valar, making far journeys 
in search of the secrets of land and water and all living things, yet the peoples of 
Tuna and Alqualonde drew together in those days. Finwe was king in Tirion and 
Olwe in Alqualonde; but Ingwe was ever held the High King of all the Elves. He 
abode thereafter at the feet of Manwe upon Taniquetil. 

Feanor and his sons abode seldom in one place for long, but travelled far and 
wide upon the confines of Valinor, going even to the borders of the Dark and the 
cold shores of the Outer Sea, seeking the unknown. Often they were guests in the 
halls of Aule; but Celegorm went rather to the house of Orome, and there he got 
great knowledge of birds and beasts, and all their tongues he knew. For all living 
things that are or have been in the Kingdom of Arda, save only the fell and evil 
creatures of Melkor, lived then in the land of Aman; and there also were many 
other creatures that have not been seen upon Middle-earth, and perhaps never 
now shall be, since the fashion of the world was changed. 





CHAPTER 6 



OF FEANOR AND THE UNCHAINING OF MELKQR 


Now the Three Kindreds of the Eldar were gathered at last in Valinor, and 
Melkor was chained. This was the Noontide of the Blessed Realm, the fullness 
of its glory and its bliss, long in tale of years, but in memory too brief. In those 
days the Eldar became full-grown in stature of body and of mind, and the Noldor 
advanced ever in skill and knowledge; and the long years were filled with their 
joyful labours, in which many new things fair and wonderful were devised. Then 
it was that the Noldor first bethought them of letters, and Rumil of Tirion was 
the name of the loremaster who first achieved fitting signs for the recording of 
speech and song, some for graving upon metal or in stone, others for drawing 
with brush or with pen. 

In that time was born in Eldamar, in the house of the King in Tirion upon the 
crown of Tuna, the eldest of the sons of Finwe, and the most beloved. Curufinwe 
was his name, but by his mother he was called Feanor, Spirit of Fire; and thus he 
is remembered in all the tales of the Noldor. 

Miriel was the name of his mother, who was called Serinde, because of her 
surpassing skill in weaving and needlework; for her hands were more skilled to 
fineness than any hands even among the Noldor. The love of Finwe and Miriel 
was great and glad, for it began in the Blessed Realm in the Days of Bliss. But in 
the bearing of her son Miriel was consumed in spirit and body; and after his birth 
she yearned for release from the labour of living. And when she had named him, 
she said to Finwe: ‘Never again shall I bear child; for strength that would have 
nourished the life of many has gone forth into Feanor.’ 

Then Finwe was grieved, for the Noldor were in the youth of their days, and 
he desired to bring forth many children into the bliss of Aman; and he said: 
‘Surely there is healing in Aman? Here all weariness can find rest.’ But when 
Miriel languished still, Finwe sought the counsel of Manwe, and Manwe 
delivered her to the care of Irmo in Forien. At their parting (for a little while as 
he thought) Finwe was sad, for it seemed an unhappy chance that the mother 
should depart and miss the beginning at least of the childhood days of her son. 

‘It is indeed unhappy,’ said Miriel, ‘and I would weep, if I were not so weary. 
But hold me blameless in this, and in all that may come after.’ 

She went then to the gardens of Forien and lay down to sleep; but though she 
seemed to sleep, her spirit indeed departed from her body, and passed in silence 
to the halls of Mandos. The maidens of Este tended the body of Miriel, and it 
remained unwithered; but she did not return. Then Finwe lived in sorrow; and he 
went often to the gardens of Forien, and sitting beneath the silver willows beside 



the body of his wife he called her by her names. But it was unavailing; and alone 
in all the Blessed Realm he was deprived of joy. After a while he went to Lorien 
no more. 

All his love he gave thereafter to his son; and Feanor grew swiftly, as if a 
secret fire were kindled within him. He was tall, and fair of face, and masterful, 
his eyes piercingly bright and his hair raven-dark; in the pursuit of all his 
purposes eager and steadfast. Few ever changed his courses by counsel, none by 
force. He became of all the Noldor, then or after, the most subtle in mind and the 
most skilled in hand. In his youth, bettering the work of Rumil, he devised those 
letters which bear his name, and which the Eldar used ever after; and he it was 
who, first of the Noldor, discovered how gems greater and brighter than those of 
the Earth might be made with skill. The first gems that Feanor made were white 
and colourless, but being set under starlight they would blaze with blue and 
silver fires brighter than Helluin; and other crystals he made also, wherein things 
far away could be seen small but clear, as with the eyes of the eagles of Manwe. 
Seldom were the hands and mind of Feanor at rest. 

While still in his early youth he wedded Nerdanel, the daughter of a great 
smith named Mahtan, among those of the Noldor most dear to Aule; and of 
Mahtan he learned much of the making of things in metal and in stone. Nerdanel 
also was firm of will, but more patient than Feanor, desiring to understand minds 
rather than to master them, and at first she restrained him when the fire of his 
heart grew too hot; but his later deeds grieved her, and they became estranged. 
Seven sons she bore to Feanor; her mood she bequeathed in part to some of 
them, but not to all. 

Now it came to pass that Finwe took as his second wife Indis the Fair. She 
was a Vanya, close kin of Ingwe the High King, golden-haired and tall, and in all 
ways unlike Miriel. Finwe loved her greatly, and was glad again. But the shadow 
of Miriel did not depart from the house of Finwe, nor from his heart; and of all 
whom he loved Feanor had ever the chief share of his thought. 

The wedding of his father was not pleasing to Feanor; and he had no great 
love for Indis, nor for Fingolfin and Finarfin, her sons. He lived apart from them, 
exploring the land of Aman, or busying himself with the knowledge and the 
crafts in which he delighted. In those unhappy things which later came to pass, 
and in which Feanor was the leader, many saw the effect of this breach within 
the house of Finwe, judging that if Finwe had endured his loss and been content 
with the fathering of his mighty son, the courses of Feanor would have been 
otherwise, and great evil might have been prevented; for the sorrow and the 
strife in the house of Finwe is graven in the memory of the Noldorin Elves. But 
the children of Indis were great and glorious, and their children also; and if they 



had not lived the history of the Eldar would have been diminished. 


Now even while Feanor and the craftsmen of the Noldor worked with delight, 
foreseeing no end to their labours, and while the sons of Indis grew to their full 
stature, the Noontide of Valinor was drawing to its close. For it came to pass that 
Melkor, as the Valar had decreed, completed the term of his bondage, dwelling 
for three ages in the duress of Mandos, alone. At length, as Manwe had 
promised, he was brought again before the thrones of the Valar. Then he looked 
upon their glory and their bliss, and envy was in his heart; he looked upon the 
Children of Iluvatar that sat at the feet of the Mighty, and hatred filled him; he 
looked upon the wealth of bright gems, and he lusted for them; but he hid his 
thoughts, and postponed his vengeance. 

Before the gates of Valmar Melkor abased himself at the feet of Manwe and 
sued for pardon, vowing that if he might be made only the least of the free 
people of Valinor he would aid the Valar in all their works, and most of all in the 
healing of the many hurts that he had done to the world. And Nienna aided his 
prayer; but Mandos was silent. 

Then Manwe granted him pardon; but the Valar would not yet suffer him to 
depart beyond their sight and vigilance, and he was constrained to dwell within 
the gates of Valmar. But fair-seeming were all the words and deeds of Melkor in 
that time, and both the Valar and the Eldar had profit from his aid and counsel, if 
they sought it; and therefore in a while he was given leave to go freely about the 
land, and it seemed to Manwe that the evil of Melkor was cured. For Manwe was 
free from evil and could not comprehend it, and he knew that in the beginning, 
in the thought of Iluvatar, Melkor had been even as he; and he saw not to the 
depths of Melkor’s heart, and did not perceive that all love had departed from 
him for ever. But Ulmo was not deceived, and Tulkas clenched his hands 
whenever he saw Melkor his foe go by; for if Tulkas is slow to wrath he is slow 
also to forget. But they obeyed the judgement of Manwe; for those who will 
defend authority against rebellion must not themselves rebel. 

Now in his heart Melkor most hated the Eldar, both because they were fair and 
joyful and because in them he saw the reason for the arising of the Valar, and his 
own downfall. Therefore all the more did he feign love for them and seek their 
friendship, and he offered them the service of his lore and labour in any great 
deed that they would do. The Vanyar indeed held him in suspicion, for they 
dwelt in the light of the Trees and were content; and to the Teleri he gave small 
heed, thinking them of little worth, tools too weak for his designs. But the 
Noldor took delight in the hidden knowledge that he could reveal to them; and 



some hearkened to words that it would have been better for them never to have 
heard. Melkor indeed declared afterwards that Feanor had learned much art from 
him in secret, and had been instructed by him in the greatest of all his works; but 
he lied in his lust and his envy, for none of the Eldalie ever hated Melkor more 
than Feanor son of Finwe, who first named him Morgoth; and snared though he 
was in the webs of Melkor’s malice against the Valar he held no converse with 
him and took no counsel from him. For Feanor was driven by the fire of his own 
heart only, working ever swiftly and alone; and he asked the aid and sought the 
counsel of none that dwelt in Aman, great or small, save only and for a little 
while of Nerdanel the wise, his wife. 



CHAPTER 7 



OF THE SILMARILS AND THE UNREST OF THE NOLDOR 


In that time were made those things that afterwards were most renowned of all 
the works of the Elves. For Feanor, being come to his full might, was filled with 
a new thought, or it may be that some shadow of foreknowledge came to him of 
the doom that drew near; and he pondered how the light of the Trees, the glory 
of the Blessed Realm, might be preserved imperishable. Then he began a long 
and secret labour, and he summoned all his lore, and his power, and his subtle 
skill; and at the end of all he made the Silmarils. 

As three great jewels they were in form. But not until the End, when Feanor 
shall return who perished ere the Sun was made, and sits now in the Halls of 
Awaiting and comes no more among his kin; not until the Sun passes and the 
Moon falls, shall it be known of what substance they were made. Tike the crystal 
of diamonds it appeared, and yet was more strong than adamant, so that no 
violence could mar it or break it within the Kingdom of Arda. Yet that crystal 
was to the Silmarils but as is the body to the Children of Iluvatar: the house of its 
inner fire, that is within it and yet in all parts of it, and is its life. And the inner 
fire of the Silmarils Feanor made of the blended light of the Trees of Valinor, 
which lives in them yet, though the Trees have long withered and shine no more. 
Therefore even in the darkness of the deepest treasury the Silmarils of their own 
radiance shone like the stars of Varda; and yet, as were they indeed living things, 
they rejoiced in light and received it and gave it back in hues more marvellous 
than before. 

All who dwelt in Aman were filled with wonder and delight at the work of 
Feanor. And Varda hallowed the Silmarils, so that thereafter no mortal flesh, nor 
hands unclean, nor anything of evil will might touch them, but it was scorched 
and withered; and Mandos foretold that the fates of Arda, earth, sea, and air, lay 
locked within them. The heart of Feanor was fast bound to these things that he 
himself had made. 

Then Melkor lusted for the Silmarils, and the very memory of their radiance 
was a gnawing fire in his heart. From that time forth, inflamed by this desire, he 
sought ever more eagerly how he should destroy Feanor and end the friendship 
of the Valar and the Elves; but he dissembled his purposes with cunning, and 
nothing of his malice could yet be seen in the semblance that he wore. Fong was 
he at work, and slow at first and barren was his labour. But he that sows lies in 
the end shall not lack of a harvest, and soon he may rest from toil indeed while 
others reap and sow in his stead. Ever Melkor found some ears that would heed 
him, and some tongues that would enlarge what they had heard; and his lies 



passed from friend to friend, as secrets of which the knowledge proves the teller 
wise. Bitterly did the Noldor atone for the folly of their open ears in the days that 
followed after. 

When he saw that many leaned towards him, Melkor would often walk among 
them, and amid his fair words others were woven, so subtly that many who heard 
them believed in recollection that they arose from their own thought. Visions he 
would conjure in their hearts of the mighty realms that they could have ruled at 
their own will, in power and freedom in the East; and then whispers went abroad 
that the Valar had brought the Eldar to Aman because of their jealousy, fearing 
that the beauty of the Quendi and the makers’ power that Iluvatar had 
bequeathed to them would grow too great for the Valar to govern, as the Elves 
waxed and spread over the wide lands of the world. 

In those days, moreover, though the Valar knew indeed of the coming of Men 
that were to be, the Elves as yet knew naught of it; for Manwe had not revealed 
it to them. But Melkor spoke to them in secret of Mortal Men, seeing how the 
silence of the Valar might be twisted to evil. Little he knew yet concerning Men, 
for engrossed with his own thought in the Music he had paid small heed to the 
Third Theme of Iluvatar; but now the whisper went among the Elves that Manwe 
held them captive, so that Men might come and supplant them in the kingdoms 
of Middle-earth, for the Valar saw that they might more easily sway this short¬ 
lived and weaker race, defrauding the Elves of the inheritance of Iluvatar. Small 
truth was there in this, and little have the Valar ever prevailed to sway the wills 
of Men; but many of the Noldor believed, or half believed, the evil words. 

Thus ere the Valar were aware, the peace of Valinor was poisoned. The Noldor 
began to murmur against them, and many became filled with pride, forgetting 
how much of what they had and knew came to them in gift from the Valar. 
Fiercest burned the new flame of desire for freedom and wider realms in the 
eager heart of Feanor; and Melkor laughed in his secrecy, for to that mark his 
lies had been addressed, hating Feanor above all, and lusting ever for the 
Silmarils. But these he was not suffered to approach; for though at great feasts 
Feanor would wear them, blazing on his brow, at other times they were guarded 
close, locked in the deep chambers of his hoard in Tirion. For Feanor began to 
love the Silmarils with a greedy love, and grudged the sight of them to all save 
to his father and his seven sons; he seldom remembered now that the light within 
them was not his own. 

High princes were Feanor and Fingolfin, the elder sons of Finwe, honoured by 
all in Aman; but now they grew proud and jealous each of his rights and his 
possessions. Then Melkor set new lies abroad in Eldamar, and whispers came to 
Feanor that Fingolfin and his sons were plotting to usurp the leadership of Finwe 



and of the elder line of Feanor, and to supplant them by the leave of the Valar; 
for the Valar were ill-pleased that the Silmarils lay in Tirion and were not 
committed to their keeping. But to Fingolfin and Finarfin it was said: ‘Beware! 
Small love has the proud son of Miriel ever had for the children of Indis. Now he 
has become great, and he has his father in his hand. It will not be long before he 
drives you forth from Tuna!’ 

And when Melkor saw that these lies were smouldering, and that pride and 
anger were awake among the Noldor, he spoke to them concerning weapons; and 
in that time the Noldor began the smithying of swords and axes and spears. 
Shields also they made displaying the tokens of many houses and kindreds that 
vied one with another; and these only they wore abroad, and of other weapons 
they did not speak, for each believed that he alone had received the warning. 
And Feanor made a secret forge, of which not even Melkor was aware; and there 
he tempered fell swords for himself and for his sons, and made tall helms with 
plumes of red. Bitterly did Mahtan rue the day when he taught to the husband of 
Nerdanel all the lore of metalwork that he had learned of Aule. 

Thus with lies and evil whisperings and false counsel Melkor kindled the 
hearts of the Noldor to strife; and of their quarrels came at length the end of the 
high days of Valinor and the evening of its ancient glory. For Feanor now began 
openly to speak words of rebellion against the Valar, crying aloud that he would 
depart from Valinor back to the world without, and would deliver the Noldor 
from thraldom, if they would follow him. 

Then there was great unrest in Tirion, and Finwe was troubled; and he 
summoned all his lords to council. But Fingolfin hastened to his halls and stood 
before him, saying: ‘King and father, wilt thou not restrain the pride of our 
brother, Curufinwe, who is called the Spirit of Fire, all too truly? By what right 
does he speak for all our people, as if he were King? Thou it was who long ago 
spoke before the Quendi, bidding them accept the summons of the Valar to 
Aman. Thou it was that led the Noldor upon the long road through the perils of 
Middle-earth to the light of Eldamar. If thou dost not now repent of it, two sons 
at least thou hast to honour thy words? 

But even as Fingolfin spoke, Feanor strode into the chamber, and he was fully 
armed: his high helm upon his head, and at his side a mighty sword. ‘So it is, 
even as I guessed? he said. ‘My half-brother would be before me with my father, 
in this as in all other matters? Then turning upon Fingolfin he drew his sword, 
crying: ‘Get thee gone, and take thy due place!’ 

Fingolfin bowed before Finwe, and without word or glance to Feanor he went 
from the chamber. But Feanor followed him, and at the door of the king’s house 
he stayed him; and the point of his bright sword he set against Fingolfin’s breast. 



‘See, half-brother!’ he said. ‘This is sharper than thy tongue. Try but once more 
to usurp my place and the love of my father, and maybe it will rid the Noldor of 
one who seeks to be the master of thralls.’ 

These words were heard by many, for the house of Finwe was in the great 
square beneath the Mindon; but again Fingolfin made no answer, and passing 
through the throng in silence he went to seek Finarfin his brother. 

Now the unrest of the Noldor was not indeed hidden from the Valar, but its 
seed had been sown in the dark; and therefore, since Feanor first spoke openly 
against them, they judged that he was the mover of discontent, being eminent in 
self-will and arrogance, though all the Noldor had become proud. And Manwe 
was grieved, but he watched and said no word. The Valar had brought the Eldar 
to their land freely, to dwell or to depart; and though they might judge departure 
to be folly, they might not restrain them from it. But now the deeds of Feanor 
could not be passed over, and the Valar were angered and dismayed; and he was 
summoned to appear before them at the gates of Valmar, to answer for all his 
words and deeds. There also were summoned all others who had any part in this 
matter, or any knowledge of it; and Feanor standing before Mandos in the Ring 
of Doom was commanded to answer all that was asked of him. Then at last the 
root was laid bare, and the malice of Melkor revealed; and straightway Tulkas 
left the council to lay hands upon him and bring him again to judgement. But 
Feanor was not held guiltless, for he it was that had broken the peace of Valinor 
and drawn his sword upon his kinsman; and Mandos said to him: ‘Thou speakest 
of thraldom. If thraldom it be, thou canst not escape it: for Manwe is King of 
Arda, and not of Aman only. And this deed was unlawful, whether in Aman or 
not in Aman. Therefore this doom is now made: for twelve years thou shalt leave 
Tirion where this threat was uttered. In that time take counsel with thyself, and 
remember who and what thou art. But after that time this matter shall be set in 
peace and held redressed, if others will release thee.’ 

Then Fingolfin said: ‘I will release my brother.’ But Feanor spoke no word in 
answer, standing silent before the Valar. Then he turned and left the council, and 
departed from Valmar. 

With him into banishment went his seven sons, and northward in Valinor they 
made a strong place and treasury in the hills; and there at Formenos a multitude 
of gems were laid in hoard, and weapons also, and the Silmarils were shut in a 
chamber of iron. Thither also came Finwe the King, because of the love that he 
bore to Feanor; and Fingolfin ruled the Noldor in Tirion. Thus the lies of Melkor 
were made true in seeming, though Feanor by his own deeds had brought this 
thing to pass; and the bitterness that Melkor had sown endured, and lived still 
long afterwards between the sons of Fingolfin and Feanor. 



Now Melkor, knowing that his devices had been revealed, hid himself and 
passed from place to place as a cloud in the hills; and Tulkas sought for him in 
vain. Then it seemed to the people of Valinor that the light of the Trees was 
dimmed, and the shadows of all standing things grew longer and darker in that 
time. 

It is told that for a time Melkor was not seen again in Valinor, nor was any 
rumour heard of him, until suddenly he came to Formenos, and spoke with 
Feanor before his doors. Friendship he feigned with cunning argument, urging 
him to his former thought of flight from the trammels of the Valar; and he said: 
‘Behold the truth of all that I have spoken, and how thou art banished unjustly. 
But if the heart of Feanor is yet free and bold as were his words in Tirion, then I 
will aid him, and bring him far from this narrow land. For am I not Vala also? 
Yea, and more than those who sit in pride in Valimar; and I have ever been a 
friend to the Noldor, most skilled and most valiant of the people of Arda.’ 

Now Feanor’s heart was still bitter at his humiliation before Mandos, and he 
looked at Melkor in silence, pondering if indeed he might yet trust him so far as 
to aid him in his flight. And Melkor, seeing that Feanor wavered, and knowing 
that the Silmarils held his heart in thrall, said at the last: ‘Here is a strong place, 
and well guarded; but think not that the Silmarils will lie safe in any treasury 
within the realm of the Valar! ’ 

But his cunning overreached his aim; his words touched too deep, and awoke 
a fire more fierce than he designed; and Feanor looked upon Melkor with eyes 
that burned through his fair semblance and pierced the cloaks of his mind, 
perceiving there his fierce lust for the Silmarils. Then hate overcame Feanor’s 
fear, and he cursed Melkor and bade him be gone, saying: ‘Get thee gone from 
my gate, thou jail-crow of Mandos!’ And he shut the doors of his house in the 
face of the mightiest of all the dwellers in Ea. 

Then Melkor departed in shame, for he was himself in peril, and he saw not 
his time yet for revenge; but his heart was black with anger. And Finwe was 
filled with great fear, and in haste he sent messengers to Manwe in Valmar. 

Now the Valar were sitting in council before their gates, fearing the 
lengthening of the shadows, when the messengers came from Formenos. At once 
Orome and Tulkas sprang up, but even as they set out in pursuit messengers 
came from Eldamar, telling that Melkor had fled through the Calacirya, and from 
the hill of Tuna the Elves had seen him pass in wrath as a thundercloud. And 
they said that thence he had turned northward, for the Teleri in Alqualonde had 
seen his shadow going by their haven towards Araman. 

Thus Melkor departed from Valinor, and for a while the Two Trees shone 
again unshadowed, and the land was filled with light. But the Valar sought in 



vain for tidings of their enemy; and as a cloud far off that looms ever higher, 
borne upon a slow cold wind, a doubt now marred the joy of all the dwellers in 
Aman, dreading they knew not what evil that yet might come. 



CHAPTER 8 



OF THE DARKENING OF VALINOR 


When Manwe heard of the ways that Melkor had taken, it seemed plain to him 
that he purposed to escape to his old strongholds in the north of Middle-earth; 
and Orome and Tulkas went with all speed northward, seeking to overtake him if 
they might, but they found no trace or rumour of him beyond the shores of the 
Teleri, in the unpeopled wastes that drew near to the Ice. Thereafter the watch 
was redoubled along the northern fences of Aman; but to no purpose, for ere 
ever the pursuit set out Melkor had turned back, and in secrecy passed away far 
to the south. For he was yet as one of the Valar, and could change his form, or 
walk unclad, as could his brethren; though that power he was soon to lose for 
ever. 

Thus unseen he came at last to the dark region of Avathar. That narrow land 
lay south of the Bay of Eldamar, beneath the eastern feet of the Pelori, and its 
long and mournful shores stretched away into the south, lightless and 
unexplored. There, beneath the sheer walls of the mountains and the cold dark 
sea, the shadows were deepest and thickest in the world; and there in Avathar, 
secret and unknown, Ungoliant had made her abode. The Eldar knew not whence 
she came; but some have said that in ages long before she descended from the 
darkness that lies about Arda, when Melkor first looked down in envy upon the 
Kingdom of Manwe, and that in the beginning she was one of those that he 
corrupted to his service. But she had disowned her Master, desiring to be 
mistress of her own lust, taking all things to herself to feed her emptiness; and 
she fled to the south, escaping the assaults of the Valar and the hunters of 
Orome, for their vigilance had ever been to the north, and the south was long 
unheeded. Thence she had crept towards the light of the Blessed Realm; for she 
hungered for light and hated it. 

In a ravine she lived, and took shape as a spider of monstrous form, weaving 
her black webs in a cleft of the mountains. There she sucked up all light that she 
could find, and spun it forth again in dark nets of strangling gloom, until no light 
more could come to her abode; and she was famished. 

Now Melkor came to Avathar and sought her out; and he put on again the 
form that he had worn as the tyrant of Utumno: a dark Lord, tall and terrible. In 
that form he remained ever after. There in the black shadows, beyond the sight 
even of Manwe in his highest halls, Melkor with Ungoliant plotted his revenge. 
But when Ungoliant understood the purpose of Melkor, she was torn between 
lust and great fear; for she was loath to dare the perils of Aman and the power of 
the dreadful Lords, and she would not stir from her hiding. Therefore Melkor 



said to her: ‘Do as I bid; and if thou hunger still when all is done, then I will give 
thee whatsoever thy lust may demand. Yea, with both hands . 5 Lightly he made 
this vow, as he ever did; and he laughed in his heart. Thus did the great thief set 
his lure for the lesser. 

A cloak of darkness she wove about them when Melkor and Ungoliant set 
forth: an Unlight, in which things seemed to be no more, and which eyes could 
not pierce, for it was void. Then slowly she wrought her webs: rope by rope 
from cleft to cleft, from jutting rock to pinnacle of stone, ever climbing upwards, 
crawling and clinging, until at last she reached the very summit of Hyarmentir, 
the highest mountain in that region of the world, far south of great Taniquetil. 
There the Valar were not vigilant; for west of the Pelori was an empty land in 
twilight, and eastward the mountains looked out, save for forgotten Avathar, only 
upon the dim waters of the pathless sea. 

But now upon the mountain-top dark Ungoliant lay; and she made a ladder of 
woven ropes and cast it down, and Melkor climbed upon it and came to that high 
place, and stood beside her, looking down upon the Guarded Realm. Below them 
lay the woods of Orome, and westward shimmered the fields and pastures of 
Yavanna, gold beneath the tall wheat of the gods. But Melkor looked north, and 
saw afar the shining plain, and the silver domes of Valmar gleaming in the 
mingling of the lights of Telperion and Laurelin. Then Melkor laughed aloud, 
and leapt swiftly down the long western slopes; and Ungoliant was at his side, 
and her darkness covered them. 

Now it was a time of festival, as Melkor knew well. Though all tides and 
seasons were at the will of the Valar, and in Valinor there was no winter of death, 
nonetheless they dwelt then in the Kingdom of Arda, and that was but a small 
realm in the halls of Ea, whose life is Time, which flows ever from the first note 
to the last chord of Eru. And even as it was then the delight of the Valar (as is 
told in the Ainulindale) to clothe themselves as in a vesture in the forms of the 
Children of Iluvatar, so also did they eat and drink, and gather the fruits of 
Yavanna from the Earth, which under Eru they had made. 

Therefore Yavanna set times for the flowering and the ripening of all things 
that grew in Valinor; and at each first gathering of fruits Manwe made a high 
feast for the praising of Eru, when all the peoples of Valinor poured forth their 
joy in music and song upon Taniquetil. This now was the hour, and Manwe 
decreed a feast more glorious than any that had been held since the coming of 
the Eldar to Aman. For though the escape of Melkor portended toils and sorrows 
to come, and indeed none could tell what further hurts would be done to Arda 
ere he could be subdued again, at this time Manwe designed to heal the evil that 
had arisen among the Noldor; and all were bidden to come to his halls upon 



Taniquetil, there to put aside the griefs that lay between their princes, and forget 
utterly the lies of their Enemy. 

There came the Vanyar, and there came the Noldor of Tirion, and the Maiar 
were gathered together, and the Valar were arrayed in their beauty and majesty; 
and they sang before Manwe and Varda in their lofty halls, or danced upon the 
green slopes of the Mountain that looked west towards the Trees. In that day the 
streets of Valmar were empty, and the stairs of Tirion were silent; and all the land 
lay sleeping in peace. Only the Teleri beyond the mountains still sang upon the 
shores of the sea; for they recked little of seasons or times, and gave no thought 
to the cares of the Rulers of Arda, or the shadow that had fallen on Valinor, for it 
had not touched them, as yet. 

One thing only marred the design of Manwe.Feanor came indeed, for him 
alone Manwe had commanded to come; but Finwe came not, nor any others of 
the Noldor of Formenos. For said Finwe: 'While the ban lasts upon Feanor my 
son, that he may not go to Tirion, I hold myself unkinged, and I will not meet my 
people.’ And Feanor came not in raiment of festival, and he wore no ornament, 
neither silver nor gold nor any gem; and he denied the sight of the Silmarils to 
the Valar and the Eldar, and left them locked in Formenos in their chamber of 
iron. Nevertheless he met Fingolfin before the throne of Manwe, and was 
reconciled, in word; and Fingolfin set at naught the unsheathing of the sword. 
For Fingolfin held forth his hand, saying: ‘As I promised, I do now. I release 
thee, and remember no grievance.’ 

Then Feanor took his hand in silence; but Fingolfin said: ‘Half-brother in 
blood, full brother in heart will I be. Thou shalt lead and I will follow. May no 
new grief divide us.’ 

‘I hear thee,’ said Feanor. ‘So be it.’ But they did not know the meaning that 
their words would bear. 

It is told that even as Feanor and Fingolfin stood before Manwe there came 
the mingling of the lights, when both Trees were shining, and the silent city of 
Valmar was filled with a radiance of silver and gold. And in that very hour 
Melkor and Ungoliant came hastening over the fields of Valinor, as the shadow 
of a black cloud upon the wind fleets over the sunlit earth; and they came before 
the green mound Ezellohar. Then the Unlight of Ungoliant rose up even to the 
roots of the Trees, and Melkor sprang upon the mound; and with his black spear 
he smote each Tree to its core, wounded them deep, and their sap poured forth as 
it were their blood, and was spilled upon the ground. But Ungoliant sucked it up, 
and going then from Tree to Tree she set her black beak to their wounds, till they 
were drained; and the poison of Death that was in her went into their tissues and 
withered them, root, branch, and leaf; and they died. And still she thirsted, and 



going to the Wells of Varda she drank them dry; but Ungoliant belched forth 
black vapours as she drank, and swelled to a shape so vast and hideous that 
Melkor was afraid. 


So the great darkness fell upon Valinor. Of the deeds of that day much is told 
in the Aldudenie, that Elemmire of the Vanyar made and is known to all the 
Eldar. Yet no song or tale could contain all the grief and terror that then befell. 
The Light failed; but the Darkness that followed was more than loss of light. In 
that hour was made a Darkness that seemed not lack but a thing with being of its 
own: for it was indeed made by malice out of Light, and it had power to pierce 
the eye, and to enter heart and mind, and strangle the very will. 

Varda looked down from Taniquetil, and beheld the Shadow soaring up in 
sudden towers of gloom; Valmar had foundered in a deep sea of night. Soon the 
Holy Mountain stood alone, a last island in a world that was drowned. All song 
ceased. There was silence in Valinor, and no sound could be heard, save only 
from afar there came on the wind through the pass of the mountains the wailing 
of the Teleri like the cold cry of gulls. For it blew chill from the East in that hour, 
and the vast shadows of the sea were rolled against the walls of the shore. 

But Manwe from his high seat looked out, and his eyes alone pierced through 
the night, until they saw a Darkness beyond dark which they could not penetrate, 
huge but far away, moving now northward with great speed; and he knew that 
Melkor had come and gone. 

Then the pursuit was begun; and the earth shook beneath the horses of the host 
of Orome, and the fire that was stricken from the hooves of Nahar was the first 
light that returned to Valinor. But so soon as any came up with the Cloud of 
Ungoliant the riders of the Valar were blinded and dismayed, and they were 
scattered, and went they knew not whither; and the sound of the Valaroma 
faltered and failed. And Tulkas was as one caught in a black net at night, and he 
stood powerless and beat the air in vain. But when the Darkness had passed, it 
was too late: Melkor had gone whither he would, and his vengeance was 
achieved. 



CHAPTER 9 



OF THE FLIGHT OF THE NOLDOR 


After a time a great concourse gathered about the Ring of Doom; and the Valar 
sat in shadow, for it was night. But the stars of Varda now glimmered overhead, 
and the air was clear; for the winds of Manwe had driven away the vapours of 
death and rolled back the shadows of the sea. Then Yavanna arose and stood 
upon Ezellohar, the Green Mound, but it was bare now and black; and she laid 
her hands upon the Trees, but they were dead and dark, and each branch that she 
touched broke and fell lifeless at her feet. Then many voices were lifted in 
lamentation; and it seemed to those that mourned that they had drained to the 
dregs the cup of woe that Melkor had filled for them. But it was not so. 

Yavanna spoke before the Valar, saying: ‘The Light of the Trees has passed 
away, and lives now only in the Silmarils of Feanor. Foresighted was he! Even 
for those who are mightiest under Iluvatar there is some work that they may 
accomplish once, and once only. The Light of the Trees I brought into being, and 
within Ea I can do so never again. Yet had I but a little of that light I could recall 
life to the Trees, ere their roots decay; and then our hurt should be healed, and 
the malice of Melkor be confounded.’ 

Then Manwe spoke and said: ‘Hearest thou, Feanor son of Finwe, the words 
of Yavanna? Wilt thou grant what she would ask?’ 

There was long silence, but Feanor answered no word. Then Tulkas cried: 
‘Speak, O Noldo, yea or nay! But who shall deny Yavanna? And did not the light 
of the Silmarils come from her work in the beginning?’ 

But Aule the Maker said: ‘Be not hasty! We ask a greater thing than thou 
knowest. Let him have peace yet awhile.’ 

But Feanor spoke then, and cried bitterly: ‘For the less even as for the greater 
there is some deed that he may accomplish but once only; and in that deed his 
heart shall rest. It may be that I can unlock my jewels, but never again shall I 
make their like; and if I must break them, I shall break my heart, and I shall be 
slain; first of all the Eldar in Aman.’ 

‘Not the first,’ said Mandos, but they did not understand his word; and again 
there was silence, while Feanor brooded in the dark. It seemed to him that he 
was beset in a ring of enemies, and the words of Melkor returned to him, saying 
that the Silmarils were not safe, if the Valar would possess them. ‘And is he not 
Vala as are they,’ said his thought, ‘and does he not understand their hearts? Yea, 
a thief shall reveal thieves!’ Then he cried aloud: ‘This thing I will not do of free 
will. But if the Valar will constrain me, then shall I know indeed that Melkor is 
of their kindred.’ 



Then Mandos said: Thou hast spoken.’ And Nienna arose and went up onto 
Ezellohar, and cast back her grey hood, and with her tears washed away the 
defilements of Ungoliant; and she sang in mourning for the bitterness of the 
world and the Marring of Arda. 

But even as Nienna mourned, there came messengers from Formenos, and 
they were Noldor and bore new tidings of evil. For they told how a blind 
Darkness came northward, and in the midst walked some power for which there 
was no name, and the Darkness issued from it. But Melkor also was there, and 
he came to the house of Feanor, and there he slew Finwe King of the Noldor 
before his doors, and spilled the first blood in the Blessed Realm; for Finwe 
alone had not fled from the horror of the Dark. And they told that Melkor had 
broken the stronghold of Formenos, and taken all the jewels of the Noldor that 
were hoarded in that place; and the Silmarils were gone. 

Then Feanor rose, and lifting up his hand before Manwe he cursed Melkor, 
naming him Morgoth, the Black Foe of the World; and by that name only was he 
known to the Eldar ever after. And he cursed also the summons of Manwe and 
the hour in which he came to Taniquetil, thinking in the madness of his rage and 
grief that had he been at Formenos his strength would have availed more than to 
be slain also, as Melkor had purposed. Then Feanor ran from the Ring of Doom, 
and fled into the night; for his father was dearer to him than the Fight of Valinor 
or the peerless works of his hands; and who among sons, of Elves or of Men, 
have held their fathers of greater worth? 

Many there grieved for the anguish of Feanor, but his loss was not his alone; 
and Yavanna wept by the mound, in fear that the Darkness should swallow the 
last rays of the Fight of Valinor for ever. For though the Valar did not yet 
understand fully what had befallen, they perceived that Melkor had called upon 
some aid that came from beyond Arda. The Silmarils had passed away, and all 
one it may seem whether Feanor had said yea or nay to Yavanna; yet had he said 
yea at the first, before the tidings came from Formenos, it may be that his after 
deeds would have been other than they were. But now the doom of the Noldor 
drew near. 

Meanwhile Morgoth escaping from the pursuit of the Valar came to the wastes 
of Araman. This land lay northward between the Mountains of the Pelori and the 
Great Sea, as Avathar lay to the south; but Araman was a wider land, and 
between the shores and the mountains were barren plains, ever colder as the Ice 
drew nearer. Through this region Morgoth and Ungoliant passed in haste, and so 
came through the great mists of Oiomure to the Helcaraxe, where the strait 
between Araman and Middle-earth was filled with grinding ice; and he crossed 
over, and came back at last to the north of the Outer Fands. Together they went 



on, for Morgoth could not elude Ungoliant, and her cloud was still about him, 
and all her eyes were upon him; and they came to those lands that lay north of 
the Firth of Drengist. Now Morgoth was drawing near to the ruins of Angband, 
where his great western stronghold had been; and Ungoliant perceived his hope, 
and knew that here he would seek to escape from her, and she stayed him, 
demanding that he fulfil his promise. 

‘Blackheart!’ she said. ‘I have done thy bidding. But I hunger still.’ 

‘What wouldst thou have more?’ said Morgoth. ‘Dost thou desire all the world 
for thy belly? I did not vow to give thee that. I am its Lord.’ 

‘Not so much,’ said Ungoliant. ‘But thou hast a great treasure from Formenos; 
I will have all that. Yea, with both hands thou shalt give it.’ 

Then perforce Morgoth surrendered to her the gems that he bore with him, one 
by one and grudgingly; and she devoured them, and their beauty perished from 
the world. Huger and darker yet grew Ungoliant, but her lust was unsated. ‘With 
one hand thou givest,’ she said; ‘with the left only. Open thy right hand.’ 

In his right hand Morgoth held close the Silmarils, and though they were 
locked in a crystal casket, they had begun to burn him, and his hand was 
clenched in pain; but he would not open it. ‘Nay!’ he said. ‘Thou hast had thy 
due. For with my power that I put into thee thy work was accomplished. I need 
thee no more. These things thou shalt not have, nor see. I name them unto myself 
for ever.’ 

But Ungoliant had grown great, and he less by the power that had gone out of 
him; and she rose against him, and her cloud closed about him, and she 
enmeshed him in a web of clinging thongs to strangle him. Then Morgoth sent 
forth a terrible cry, that echoed in the mountains. Therefore that region was 
called Lammoth; for the echoes of his voice dwelt there ever after, so that any 
who cried aloud in that land awoke them, and all the waste between the hills and 
the sea was filled with a clamour as of voices in anguish. The cry of Morgoth in 
that hour was the greatest and most dreadful that was ever heard in the northern 
world; the mountains shook, and the earth trembled, and rocks were riven 
asunder. Deep in forgotten places that cry was heard. Far beneath the ruined halls 
of Angband, in vaults to which the Valar in the haste of their assault had not 
descended, Balrogs lurked still, awaiting ever the return of their Lord; and now 
swiftly they arose, and passing over Hithlum they came to Lammoth as a 
tempest of fire. With their whips of flame they smote asunder the webs of 
Ungoliant, and she quailed, and turned to flight, belching black vapours to cover 
her; and fleeing from the north she went down into Beleriand, and dwelt beneath 
Ered Gorgoroth, in that dark valley that was after called Nan Dungortheb, the 
Valley of Dreadful Death, because of the horror that she bred there. For other 



foul creatures of spider form had dwelt there since the days of the delving of 
Angband, and she mated with them, and devoured them; and even after 
Ungoliant herself departed, and went whither she would into the forgotten south 
of the world, her offspring abode there and wove their hideous webs. Of the fate 
of Ungoliant no tale tells. Yet some have said that she ended long ago, when in 
her uttermost famine she devoured herself at last. 

And thus the fear of Yavanna that the Silmarils would be swallowed up and 
fall into nothingness did not come to pass; but they remained in the power of 
Morgoth. And he being freed gathered again all his servants that he could find, 
and came to the ruins of Angband. There he delved anew his vast vaults and 
dungeons, and above their gates he reared the threefold peaks of Thangorodrim, 
and a great reek of dark smoke was ever wreathed about them. There countless 
became the hosts of his beasts and his demons, and the race of the Ores, bred 
long before, grew and multiplied in the bowels of the earth. Dark now fell the 
shadow on Beleriand, as is told hereafter; but in Angband Morgoth forged for 
himself a great crown of iron, and he called himself King of the World. In token 
of this he set the Silmarils in his crown. His hands were burned black by the 
touch of those hallowed jewels, and black they remained ever after; nor was he 
ever free from the pain of the burning, and the anger of the pain. That crown he 
never took from his head, though its weight became a deadly weariness. Never 
but once only did he depart for a while secretly from his domain in the North; 
seldom indeed did he leave the deep places of his fortress, but governed his 
armies from his northern throne. And once only also did he himself wield 
weapon, while his realm lasted. 

For now, more than in the days of Utumno ere his pride was humbled, his 
hatred devoured him, and in the domination of his servants and the inspiring of 
them with lust of evil he spent his spirit. Nonetheless his majesty as one of the 
Valar long remained, though turned to terror, and before his face all save the 
mightiest sank into a dark pit of fear. 


Now when it was known that Morgoth had escaped from Valinor and pursuit 
was unavailing, the Valar remained long seated in darkness in the Ring of Doom, 
and the Maiar and the Vanyar stood beside them and wept; but the Noldor for the 
most part returned to Tirion and mourned for the darkening of their fair city. 
Through the dim ravine of the Calacirya fogs drifted in from the shadowy seas 
and mantled its towers, and the lamp of the Mindon burned pale in the gloom. 

Then suddenly Feanor appeared in the city and called on all to come to the 
high court of the King upon the summit of Tuna; but the doom of banishment 



that had been laid upon him was not yet lifted, and he rebelled against the Valar. 
A great multitude gathered swiftly, therefore, to hear what he would say; and the 
hill and all the stairs and streets that climbed upon it were lit with the light of 
many torches that each one bore in hand. Feanor was a master of words, and his 
tongue had great power over hearts when he would use it; and that night he made 
a speech before the Noldor which they ever remembered. Fierce and fell were 
his words, and filled with anger and pride; and hearing them the Noldor were 
stirred to madness. His wrath and his hate were given most to Morgoth, and yet 
well nigh all that he said came from the very lies of Morgoth himself; but he was 
distraught with grief for the slaying of his father, and with anguish for the rape of 
the Silmarils. He claimed now the kingship of all the Noldor, since Finwe was 
dead, and he scorned the decrees of the Valar. 

‘Why, O people of the Noldor,’ he cried, ‘why should we longer serve the 
jealous Valar, who cannot keep us nor even their own realm secure from their 
Enemy? And though he be now their foe, are not they and he of one kin? 
Vengeance calls me hence, but even were it otherwise I would not dwell longer 
in the same land with the kin of my father’s slayer and of the thief of my 
treasure. Yet I am not the only valiant in this valiant people. And have ye not all 
lost your King? And what else have ye not lost, cooped here in a narrow land 
between the mountains and the sea? 

‘Here once was light, that the Valar begrudged to Middle-earth, but now dark 
levels all. Shall we mourn here deedless for ever, a shadow-folk, mist-haunting, 
dropping vain tears in the thankless sea? Or shall we return to our home? In 
Cuivienen sweet ran the waters under unclouded stars, and wide lands lay about, 
where a free people might walk. There they lie still and await us who in our folly 
forsook them. Come away! Let the cowards keep this city!’ 

Long he spoke, and ever he urged the Noldor to follow him and by their own 
prowess to win freedom and great realms in the lands of the East, before it was 
too late; for he echoed the lies of Melkor, that the Valar had cozened them and 
would hold them captive so that Men might rule in Middle-earth. Many of the 
Eldar heard then for the first time of the Aftercomers. ‘Fair shall the end be,’ he 
cried, ‘though long and hard shall be the road! Say farewell to bondage! But say 
farewell also to ease! Say farewell to the weak! Say farewell to your treasures! 
More still shall we make. Journey light: but bring with you your swords! For we 
will go further than Orome, endure longer than Tulkas: we will never turn back 
from pursuit. After Morgoth to the ends of the Earth! War shall he have and 
hatred undying. But when we have conquered and have regained the Silmarils, 
then we and we alone shall be lords of the unsullied Light, and masters of the 
bliss and beauty of Arda. No other race shall oust us!’ 



Then Feanor swore a terrible oath. His seven sons leapt straightway to his side 
and took the selfsame vow together, and red as blood shone their drawn swords 
in the glare of the torches. They swore an oath which none shall break, and none 
should take, by the name even of Ilhvatar, calling the Everlasting Dark upon 
them if they kept it not; and Manwe they named in witness, and Varda, and the 
hallowed mountain of Taniquetil, vowing to pursue with vengeance and hatred to 
the ends of the World Vala, Demon, Elf or Man as yet unborn, or any creature, 
great or small, good or evil, that time should bring forth unto the end of days, 
whoso should hold or take or keep a Silmaril from their possession. 

Thus spoke Maedhros and Maglor and Celegorm, Curufin and Caranthir, 
Amrod and Amras, princes of the Noldor; and many quailed to hear the dread 
words. For so sworn, good or evil, an oath may not be broken, and it shall pursue 
oathkeeper and oathbreaker to the world’s end. Fingolfin and Turgon his son 
therefore spoke against Feanor, and fierce words awoke, so that once again wrath 
came near to the edge of swords. But Finarfin spoke softly, as was his wont, and 
sought to calm the Noldor, persuading them to pause and ponder ere deeds were 
done that could not be undone: and Orodreth, alone of his sons, spoke in like 
manner. Finrod was with Turgon, his friend; but Galadriel, the only woman of 
the Noldor to stand that day tall and valiant among the contending princes, was 
eager to be gone. No oaths she swore, but the words of Feanor concerning 
Middle-earth had kindled in her heart, for she yearned to see the wide unguarded 
lands and to rule there a realm at her own will. Of like mind with Galadriel was 
Fingon Fingolfin’s son, being moved also by Feanor’s words, though he loved 
him little; and with Fingon stood as they ever did Angrod and Aegnor, sons of 
Finarfin. But these held their peace and spoke not against their fathers. 

At length after long debate Feanor prevailed, and the greater part of the 
Noldor there assembled he set aflame with the desire of new things and strange 
countries. Therefore when Finarfin spoke yet again for heed and delay, a great 
shout went up: ‘Nay, let us be gone!’ And straightway Feanor and his sons began 
to prepare for the marching forth. 

Little foresight could there be for those who dared to take so dark a road. Yet 
all was done in over-haste; for Feanor drove them on, fearing lest in the cooling 
of their hearts his words should wane and other counsels yet prevail; and for all 
his proud words he did not forget the power of the Valar. But from Valmar no 
message came, and Manwe was silent. He would not yet either forbid or hinder 
Feanor’s purpose; for the Valar were aggrieved that they were charged with evil 
intent to the Eldar, or that any were held captive by them against their will. Now 
they watched and waited, for they did not yet believe that Feanor could hold the 
host of the Noldor to his will. 



And indeed when Feanor began the marshalling of the Noldor for their 
setting-out, then at once dissension arose. For though he had brought the 
assembly in a mind to depart, by no means all were of a mind to take Feanor as 
King. Greater love was given to Fingolfin and his sons, and his household and 
the most part of the dwellers in Tirion refused to renounce him, if he would go 
with them; and thus at the last as two divided hosts the Noldor set forth upon 
their bitter road. Feanor and his following were in the van, but the greater host 
came behind under Fingolfin; and he marched against his wisdom, because 
Fingon his son so urged him, and because he would not be sundered from his 
people that were eager to go, nor leave them to the rash counsels of Feanor. Nor 
did he forget his words before the throne of Manwe. With Fingolfin went 
Finarfin also and for like reasons; but most loath was he to depart. And of all the 
Noldor in Valinor, who were grown now to a great people, but one tithe refused 
to take the road: some for the love that they bore to the Valar (and to Aule not 
least), some for the love of Tirion and the many things that they had made; none 
for fear of peril by the way. 

But even as the trumpet sang and Feanor issued from the gates of Tirion a 
messenger came at last from Manwe, saying: 'Against the folly of Feanor shall 
be set my counsel only. Go not forth! For the hour is evil, and your road leads to 
sorrow that ye do not foresee. No aid will the Valar lend you in this quest; but 
neither will they hinder you; for this ye shall know: as ye came hither freely, 
freely shall ye depart. But thou Feanor Finwe’s son, by thine oath art exiled. The 
lies of Melkor thou shalt unlearn in bitterness. Vala he is, thou saist. Then thou 
hast sworn in vain, for none of the Valar canst thou overcome now or ever within 
the halls of Ea, not though Eru whom thou namest had made thee thrice greater 
than thou art.’ 

But Feanor laughed, and spoke not to the herald, but to the Noldor, saying: 
‘So! Then will this valiant people send forth the heir of their King alone into 
banishment with his sons only, and return to their bondage? But if any will come 
with me, I say to them: Is sorrow foreboded to you? But in Aman we have seen 
it. In Aman we have come through bliss to woe. The other now we will try: 
through sorrow to find joy; or freedom, at the least.’ 

Then turning to the herald he cried: ‘Say this to Manwe Sulimo, High King of 
Arda: if Feanor cannot overthrow Morgoth, at least he delays not to assail him, 
and sits not idle in grief. And it may be that Eru has set in me a fire greater than 
thou knowest. Such hurt at the least will I do to the Foe of the Valar that even the 
mighty in the Ring of Doom shall wonder to hear it. Yea, in the end they shall 
follow me. Farewell!’ 

In that hour the voice of Feanor grew so great and so potent that even the 



herald of the Valar bowed before him as one full-answered, and departed; and 
the Noldor were over-ruled. Therefore they continued their march; and the 
House of Feanor hastened before them along the coasts of Elende: not once did 
they turn their eyes back to Tirion on the green hill of Tuna. Slower and less 
eagerly came the host of Fingolfin after them. Of those Fingon was the foremost; 
but at the rear went Finarfin and Finrod, and many of the noblest and wisest of 
the Noldor; and often they looked behind them to see their fair city, until the 
lamp of the Mindon Eldalieva was lost in the night. More than any others of the 
Exiles they carried thence memories of the bliss they had forsaken, and some 
even of the things that they had made there they took with them: a solace and a 
burden on the road. 












Now Feanor led the Noldor northward, because his first purpose was to follow 
Morgoth. Moreover Tuna beneath Taniquetil was set nigh to the girdle of Arda, 
and there the Great Sea was immeasurably wide, whereas ever northward the 
sundering seas grew narrower, as the wasteland of Araman and the coasts of 
Middle-earth drew together. But as the mind of Feanor cooled and took counsel 
he perceived over-late that all these great companies would never overcome the 
long leagues to the north, nor cross the seas at the last, save with the aid of ships; 
yet it would need long time and toil to build so great a fleet, even were there any 
among the Noldor skilled in that craft. He resolved now therefore to persuade the 
Teleri, ever friends to the Noldor, to join with them; and in his rebellion he 
thought that thus the bliss of Valinor might be further diminished and his power 
for war upon Morgoth be increased. He hastened then to Alqualonde, and spoke 
to the Teleri as he had spoken before in Tirion. 

But the Teleri were unmoved by aught that he could say. They were grieved 
indeed at the going of their kinsfolk and long friends, but would rather dissuade 
them than aid them; and no ship would they lend, nor help in the building, 
against the will of the Valar. As for themselves, they desired now no other home 
but the strands of Eldamar, and no other lord than Olwe, prince of Alqualonde. 
And he had never lent ear to Morgoth, nor welcomed him to his land, and he 
trusted still that Ulmo and the other great among the Valar would redress the 
hurts of Morgoth, and that the night would pass yet to a new dawn. 

Then Feanor grew wrathful, for he still feared delay; and hotly he spoke to 
Olwe. ‘You renounce your friendship, even in the hour of our need/ he said. ‘Yet 
you were glad indeed to receive our aid when you came at last to these shores, 
fainthearted loiterers, and wellnigh emptyhanded. In huts on the beaches would 
you be dwelling still, had not the Noldor carved out your haven and toiled upon 
your walls/ 

But Olwe answered: ‘We renounce no friendship. But it may be the part of a 
friend to rebuke a friend’s folly. And when the Noldor welcomed us and gave us 
aid, otherwise then you spoke: in the land of Aman we were to dwell for ever, as 
brothers whose houses stand side by side. But as for our white ships: those you 
gave us not. We learned not that craft from the Noldor, but from the Lords of the 
Sea; and the white timbers we wrought with our own hands, and the white sails 
were woven by our wives and our daughters. Therefore we will neither give 
them nor sell them for any league or friendship. For I say to you, Feanor son of 
Finwe, these are to us as are the gems of the Noldor: the work of our hearts, 



whose like we shall not make again.’ 

Thereupon Feanor left him, and sat in dark thought beyond the walls of 
Alqualonde, until his host was assembled. When he judged that his strength was 
enough, he went to the Haven of the Swans and began to man the ships that were 
anchored there and to take them away by force. But the Teleri withstood him, 
and cast many of the Noldor into the sea. Then swords were drawn, and a bitter 
fight was fought upon the ships, and about the lamplit quays and piers of the 
Haven, and even upon the great arch of its gate. Thrice the people of Feanor 
were driven back, and many were slain upon either side; but the vanguard of the 
Noldor were succoured by Fingon with the foremost of the host of Fingolfin, 
who coming up found a battle joined and their own kin falling, and rushed in 
before they knew rightly the cause of the quarrel; some thought indeed that the 
Teleri had sought to waylay the march of the Noldor at the bidding of the Valar. 

Thus at last the Teleri were overcome, and a great part of their mariners that 
dwelt in Alqualonde were wickedly slain. For the Noldor were become fierce 
and desperate, and the Teleri had less strength, and were armed for the most part 
but with slender bows. Then the Noldor drew away their white ships and manned 
their oars as best they might, and rowed them north along the coast. And Olwe 
called upon Osse, but he came not, for it was not permitted by the Valar that the 
flight of the Noldor should be hindered by force. But Uinen wept for the 
mariners of the Teleri; and the sea rose in wrath against the slayers, so that many 
of the ships were wrecked and those in them drowned. Of the Kinslaying at 
Alqualonde more is told in that lament which is named Noldolante, the Fall of 
the Noldor, that Maglor made ere he was lost. 

Nonetheless the greater part of the Noldor escaped, and when the storm was 
past they held on their course, some by ship and some by land; but the way was 
long and ever more evil as they went forward. After they had marched for a great 
while in the unmeasured night, they came at length to the northern confines of 
the Guarded Realm, upon the borders of the empty waste of Araman which were 
mountainous and cold. There they beheld suddenly a dark figure standing high 
upon a rock that looked down upon the shore. Some say that it was Mandos 
himself, and no lesser herald of Manwe. And they heard a loud voice, solemn 
and terrible, that bade them stand and give ear. Then all halted and stood still, 
and from end to end of the hosts of the Noldor the voice was heard speaking the 
curse and prophecy which is called the Prophecy of the North, and the Doom of 
the Noldor. Much it foretold in dark words, which the Noldor understood not 
until the woes indeed after befell them; but all heard the curse that was uttered 
upon those that would not stay nor seek the doom and pardon of the Valar. 

Tears unnumbered ye shall shed; and the Valar will fence Valinor against you, 



and shut you out, so that not even the echo of your lamentation shall pass over 
the mountains. On the House of Feanor the wrath of the Valar lieth from the 
West unto the uttermost East, and upon all that will follow them it shall be laid 
also. Their Oath shall drive them, and yet betray them, and ever snatch away the 
very treasures that they have sworn to pursue. To evil end shall all things turn 
that they begin well; and by treason of kin unto kin, and the fear of treason, shall 
this come to pass. The Dispossessed shall they be for ever. 

‘Ye have spilled the blood of your kindred unrighteously and have stained the 
land of Aman. For blood ye shall render blood, and beyond Aman ye shall dwell 
in Death’s shadow. For though Eru appointed to you to die not in Ea, and no 
sickness may assail you, yet slain ye may be, and slain ye shall be: by weapon 
and by torment and by grief; and your houseless spirits shall come then to 
Mandos. There long shall ye abide and yearn for your bodies, and find little pity 
though all whom ye have slain should entreat for you. And those that endure in 
Middle-earth and come not to Mandos shall grow weary of the world as with a 
great burden, and shall wane, and become as shadows of regret before the 
younger race that cometh after. The Valar have spoken.’ 

Then many quailed; but Feanor hardened his heart and said: ‘We have sworn, 
and not lightly. This oath we will keep. We are threatened with many evils, and 
treason not least; but one thing is not said: that we shall suffer from cowardice, 
from cravens or the fear of cravens. Therefore I say that we will go on, and this 
doom I add: the deeds that we shall do shall be the matter of song until the last 
days of Arda.’ 

But in that hour Finarfin forsook the march, and turned back, being filled with 
grief, and with bitterness against the House of Feanor, because of his kinship 
with Olwe of Alqualonde; and many of his people went with him, retracing their 
steps in sorrow, until they beheld once more the far beam of the Mindon upon 
Tuna still shining in the night, and so came at last to Valinor. There they received 
the pardon of the Valar, and Finarfin was set to rule the remnant of the Noldor in 
the Blessed Realm. But his sons were not with him, for they would not forsake 
the sons of Fingolfin; and all Fingolfin’s folk went forward still, feeling the 
constraint of their kinship and the will of Feanor, and fearing to face the doom of 
the Valar, since not all of them had been guiltless of the Kinslaying at 
Alqualonde. Moreover Fingon and Turgon were bold and fiery of heart, and 
loath to abandon any task to which they had put their hands until the bitter end, 
if bitter it must be. So the main host held on, and swiftly the evil that was 
foretold began its work. 

The Noldor came at last far into the north of Arda; and they saw the first teeth 
of the ice that floated in the sea, and knew that they were drawing nigh to the 



Helcaraxe. For between the land of Aman that in the north curved eastward, and 
the east-shores of Endor (which is Middle-earth) that bore westward, there was a 
narrow strait, through which the chill waters of the Encircling Sea and the waves 
of Belegaer flowed together, and there were vast fogs and mists of deathly cold, 
and the sea-streams were filled with clashing hills of ice and the grinding of ice 
deep-sunken. Such was the Helcaraxe, and there none yet had dared to tread save 
the Valar only and Ungoliant. 

Therefore Feanor halted and the Noldor debated what course they should now 
take. But they began to suffer anguish from the cold, and the clinging mists 
through which no gleam of star could pierce; and many repented of the road and 
began to murmur, especially those that followed Fingolfin, cursing Feanor, and 
naming him as the cause of all the woes of the Eldar. But Feanor, knowing all 
that was said, took counsel with his sons; and two courses only they saw to 
escape from Araman and come into Endor: by the straits or by ship. But the 
Helcaraxe they deemed impassable, whereas the ships were too few. Many had 
been lost upon their long journey, and there remained now not enough to bear 
across all the great host together; yet none were willing to abide upon the 
western coast while others were ferried first: already the fear of treachery was 
awake among the Noldor. Therefore it came into the hearts of Feanor and his 
sons to seize all the ships and depart suddenly; for they had retained the mastery 
of the fleet since the battle of the Haven, and it was manned only by those who 
had fought there and were bound to Feanor. And as though it came at his call, 
there sprang up a wind from the north-west, and Feanor slipped away secretly 
with all whom he deemed true to him, and went aboard, and put out to sea, and 
left Fingolfin in Araman. And since the sea was there narrow, steering east and 
somewhat south he passed over without loss, and first of all the Noldor set foot 
once more upon the shores of Middle-earth; and the landing of Feanor was at the 
mouth of the firth which was called Drengist and ran into Dor-lomin. 

But when they were landed, Maedhros the eldest of his sons, and on a time the 
friend of Fingon ere Morgoth’s lies came between, spoke to Feanor, saying: 
‘Now what ships and rowers will you spare to return, and whom shall they bear 
hither first? Fingon the valiant?’ 

Then Feanor laughed as one fey, and he cried: ‘None and none! What I have 
left behind I count now no loss; needless baggage on the road it has proved. Let 
those that cursed my name, curse me still, and whine their way back to the cages 
of the Valar! Let the ships burn!’ Then Maedhros alone stood aside, but Feanor 
caused fire to be set to the white ships of the Teleri. So in that place which was 
called Losgar at the outlet of the Firth of Drengist ended the fairest vessels that 
ever sailed the sea, in a great burning, bright and terrible. And Fingolfin and his 



people saw the light afar off, red beneath the clouds; and they knew that they 
were betrayed. This was the firstfruits of the Kinslaying and the Doom of the 
Noldor. 

Then Fingolfin seeing that Feanor had left him to perish in Araman or return 
in shame to Valinor was filled with bitterness; but he desired now as never 
before to come by some way to Middle-earth, and meet Feanor again. And he 
and his host wandered long in misery, but their valour and endurance grew with 
hardship; for they were a mighty people, the elder children undying of Eru 
Iluvatar, but new-come from the Blessed Realm, and not yet weary with the 
weariness of Earth. The fire of their hearts was young, and led by Fingolfin and 
his sons, and by Finrod and Galadriel, they dared to pass into the bitterest North; 
and finding no other way they endured at last the terror of the Helcaraxe and the 
cruel hills of ice. Few of the deeds of the Noldor thereafter surpassed that 
desperate crossing in hardihood or woe. There Elenwe the wife of Turgon was 
lost, and many others perished also; and it was with a lessened host that 
Fingolfin set foot at last upon the Outer Lands. Small love for Feanor or his sons 
had those that marched at last behind him, and blew their trumpets in Middle- 
earth at the first rising of the Moon. 







CHAPTER 10 



OF THE SINDAR 


Now as has been told the power of Elwe and Melian increased in Middle-earth, 
and all the Elves of Beleriand, from the mariners of Cardan to the wandering 
hunters of the Blue Mountains beyond the River Gelion, owned Elwe as their 
lord; Elu Thingol he was called, King Greymantle, in the tongue of his people. 
They are called the Sindar, the Grey-elves of starlit Beleriand; and although they 
were Moriquendi, under the lordship of Thingol and the teaching of Melian they 
became the fairest and the most wise and skilful of all the Elves of Middle-earth. 
And at the end of the first age of the Chaining of Melkor, when all the Earth had 
peace and the glory of Valinor was at its noon, there came into the world 
Luthien, the only child of Thingol and Melian. Though Middle-earth lay for the 
most part in the Sleep of Yavanna, in Beleriand under the power of Melian there 
was life and joy, and the bright stars shone as silver fires; and there in the forest 
of Neldoreth Luthien was born, and the white flowers of niphredil came forth to 
greet her as stars from the earth. 


It came to pass during the second age of the captivity of Melkor that Dwarves 
came over the Blue Mountains of Ered Luin into Beleriand. Themselves they 
named Khazad, but the Sindar called them Naugrim, the Stunted People, and 
Gonnhirrim, Masters of Stone. Far to the east were the most ancient dwellings of 
the Naugrim, but they had delved for themselves great halls and mansions, after 
the manner of their kind, in the eastern side of Ered Luin; and those cities were 
named in their own tongue Gabilgathol and Tumunzahar. To the north of the 
great height of Mount Dolmed was Gabilgathol, which the Elves interpreted in 
their tongue Belegost, that is Mickleburg; and southward was delved 
Tumunzahar, by the Elves named Nogrod, the Hollowbold. Greatest of all the 
mansions of the Dwarves was Khazad-dum, the Dwarrowdelf, Hadhodrond in 
the Elvish tongue, that was afterwards in the days of its darkness called Moria; 
but it was far off in the Mountains of Mist beyond the wide leagues of Eriador, 
and to the Eldar came but as a name and a rumour from the words of the 
Dwarves of the Blue Mountains. 

From Nogrod and Belegost the Naugrim came forth into Beleriand; and the 
Elves were filled with amazement, for they had believed themselves to be the 
only living things in Middle-earth that spoke with words or wrought with hands, 
and that all others were but birds and beasts. But they could understand no word 
of the tongue of the Naugrim, which to their ears was cumbrous and unlovely; 



and few ever of the Eldar have achieved the mastery of it. But the Dwarves were 
swift to learn and indeed were more willing to learn the Elven-tongue than to 
teach their own to those of alien race. Few of the Eldar went ever to Nogrod and 
Belegost, save Eol of Nan Elmoth and Maeglin his son; but the Dwarves 
trafficked into Beleriand, and they made a great road that passed under the 
shoulders of Mount Dolmed and followed the course of the River Ascar, 
crossing Gelion at Sarn Athrad, the Ford of Stones, where battle after befell. 
Ever cool was the friendship between the Naugrim and the Eldar, though much 
profit they had one of the other; but at that time those griefs that lay between 
them had not yet come to pass, and King Thingol welcomed them. But the 
Naugrim gave their friendship more readily to the Noldor in after days than to 
any others of Elves and Men, because of their love and reverence for Aule; and 
the gems of the Noldor they praised above all other wealth. In the darkness of 
Arda already the Dwarves wrought great works, for even from the first days of 
their Fathers they had marvellous skill with metals and with stone; but in that 
ancient time iron and copper they loved to work, rather than silver or gold. 

Now Melian had much foresight, after the manner of the Maiar; and when the 
second age of the captivity of Melkor had passed, she counselled Thingol that 
the Peace of Arda would not last for ever. He took thought therefore how he 
should make for himself a kingly dwelling, and a place that should be strong, if 
evil were to awake again in Middle-earth; and he sought aid and counsel of the 
Dwarves of Belegost. They gave it willingly, for they were unwearied in those 
days and eager for new works; and though the Dwarves ever demanded a price 
for all that they did, whether with delight or with toil, at this time they held 
themselves paid. For Melian taught them much that they were eager to learn, and 
Thingol rewarded them with many fair pearls. These Cirdan gave to him, for 
they were got in great number in the shallow waters about the Isle of Balar; but 
the Naugrim had not before seen their like, and they held them dear. One there 
was as great as a dove’s egg, and its sheen was as starlight on the foam of the 
sea; Nimphelos it was named, and the chieftain of the Dwarves of Belegost 
prized it above a mountain of wealth. 

Therefore the Naugrim laboured long and gladly for Thingol, and devised for 
him mansions after the fashion of their people, delved deep in the earth. Where 
the Esgalduin flowed down, and parted Neldoreth from Region, there rose in the 
midst of the forest a rocky hill, and the river ran at its feet. There they made the 
gates of the hall of Thingol, and they built a bridge of stone over the river, by 
which alone the gates could be entered. Beyond the gates wide passages ran 
down to high halls and chambers far below that were hewn in the living stone, so 
many and so great that that dwelling was named Menegroth, the Thousand 



Caves. 

But the Elves also had part in that labour, and Elves and Dwarves together, 
each with their own skill, there wrought out the visions of Melian, images of the 
wonder and beauty of Valinor beyond the Sea. The pillars of Menegroth were 
hewn in the likeness of the beeches of Orome, stock, bough, and leaf, and they 
were lit with lanterns of gold. The nightingales sang there as in the gardens of 
Lorien; and there were fountains of silver, and basins of marble, and floors of 
many-coloured stones. Carven figures of beasts and birds there ran upon the 
walls, or climbed upon the pillars, or peered among the branches entwined with 
many flowers. And as the years passed Melian and her maidens filled the halls 
with woven hangings wherein could be read the deeds of the Valar, and many 
things that had befallen in Arda since its beginning, and shadows of things that 
were yet to be. That was the fairest dwelling of any king that has ever been east 
of the Sea. 

And when the building of Menegroth was achieved, and there was peace in 
the realm of Thingol and Melian, the Naugrim yet came ever and anon over the 
mountains and went in traffic about the lands; but they went seldom to the Falas, 
for they hated the sound of the sea and feared to look upon it. To Beleriand there 
came no other rumour or tidings of the world without. 

But as the third age of the captivity of Melkor drew on, the Dwarves became 
troubled, and they spoke to King Thingol, saying that the Valar had not rooted 
out utterly the evils of the North, and now the remnant, having long multiplied in 
the dark, were coming forth once more and roaming far and wide. ‘There are fell 
beasts/ they said, ‘in the land east of the mountains, and your ancient kindred 
that dwell there are flying from the plains to the hills/ 

And ere long the evil creatures came even to Beleriand, over passes in the 
mountains, or up from the south through the dark forests. Wolves there were, or 
creatures that walked in wolf-shapes, and other fell beings of shadow; and 
among them were the Ores, who afterwards wrought ruin in Beleriand: but they 
were yet few and wary, and did but smell out the ways of the land, awaiting the 
return of their lord. Whence they came, or what they were, the Elves knew not 
then, thinking them perhaps to be Avari who had become evil and savage in the 
wild; in which they guessed all too near, it is said. 

Therefore Thingol took thought for arms, which before his people had not 
needed, and these at first the Naugrim smithied for him; for they were greatly 
skilled in such work, though none among them surpassed the craftsmen of 
Nogrod, of whom Telchar the smith was greatest in renown. A warlike race of 
old were all the Naugrim, and they would fight fiercely against whomsoever 
aggrieved them: servants of Melkor, or Eldar, or Avari, or wild beasts, or not 



seldom their own kin, Dwarves of other mansions and lordships. Their 
smithcraft indeed the Sindar soon learned of them; yet in the tempering of steel 
alone of all crafts the Dwarves were never outmatched even by the Noldor, and 
in the making of mail of linked rings, which was first contrived by the smiths of 
Belegost, their work had no rival. 

At this time therefore the Sindar were well-armed, and they drove off all 
creatures of evil, and had peace again; but Thingol’s armouries were stored with 
axes and with spears and swords, and tall helms, and long coats of bright mail; 
for the hauberks of the Dwarves were so fashioned that they rusted not but shone 
ever as if they were new-burnished. And that proved well for Thingol in the time 
that was to come. 


Now as has been told, one Lenwe of the host of Olwe forsook the march of 
the Eldar at that time when the Teleri were halted by the shores of the Great 
River upon the borders of the westlands of Middle-earth. Little is known of the 
wanderings of the Nandor, whom he led away down Anduin: some, it is said, 
dwelt age-long in the woods of the Vale of the Great River, some came at last to 
its mouths and there dwelt by the Sea, and yet others passing by Ered Nimrais, 
the White Mountains, came north again and entered the wilderness of Eriador 
between Ered Luin and the far Mountains of Mist. Now these were a woodland 
people and had no weapons of steel, and the coming of the fell beasts of the 
North filled them with great fear, as the Naugrim declared to King Thingol in 
Menegroth. Therefore Denethor, the son of Lenwe, hearing rumour of the might 
of Thingol and his majesty, and of the peace of his realm, gathered such host of 
his scattered people as he could, and led them over the mountains into Beleriand. 
There they were welcomed by Thingol, as kin long lost that return, and they 
dwelt in Ossiriand, the Land of Seven Rivers. 

Of the long years of peace that followed after the coming of Denethor there is 
little tale. In those days, it is said, Daeron the Minstrel, chief loremaster of the 
kingdom of Thingol, devised his Runes; and the Naugrim that came to Thingol 
learned them, and were well-pleased with the device, esteeming Daeron’s skill 
higher than did the Sindar, his own people. By the Naugrim the Cirth were taken 
east over the mountains and passed into the knowledge of many peoples; but 
they were little used by the Sindar for the keeping of records, until the days of 
the War, and much that was held in memory perished in the ruins of Doriath. But 
of bliss and glad life there is little to be said, before it ends; as works fair and 
wonderful, while still they endure for eyes to see, are their own record, and only 
when they are in peril or broken for ever do they pass into song. 



In Beleriand in those days the Elves walked, and the rivers flowed, and the 
stars shone, and the night-flowers gave forth their scents; and the beauty of 
Melian was as the noon, and the beauty of Luthien was as the dawn in spring. In 
Beleriand King Thingol upon his throne was as the lords of the Maiar, whose 
power is at rest, whose joy is as an air that they breathe in all their days, whose 
thought flows in a tide untroubled from the heights to the deeps. In Beleriand 
still at times rode Orome the great, passing like a wind over the mountains, and 
the sound of his horn came down the leagues of the starlight, and the Elves 
feared him for the splendour of his countenance and the great noise of the onrush 
of Nahar; but when the Valaroma echoed in the hills, they knew well that all evil 
things were fled far away. 


But it came to pass at last that the end of bliss was at hand, and the noontide 
of Valinor was drawing to its twilight. For as has been told and as is known to 
all, being written in lore and sung in many songs, Melkor slew the Trees of the 
Valar with the aid of Ungoliant, and escaped, and came back to Middle-earth. 
Far to the north befell the strife of Morgoth and Ungoliant; but the great cry of 
Morgoth echoed through Beleriand, and all its people shrank for fear; for though 
they knew not what it foreboded, they heard then the herald of death. Soon 
afterwards Ungoliant fled from the north and came into the realm of King 
Thingol, and a terror of darkness was about her; but by the power of Melian she 
was stayed, and entered not into Neldoreth, but abode long time under the 
shadow of the precipices in which Dorthonion fell southward. And they became 
known as Ered Gorgoroth, the Mountains of Terror, and none dared go thither, or 
pass nigh them; there life and light were strangled, and there all waters were 
poisoned. But Morgoth, as has before been told, returned to Angband, and built 
it anew, and above its doors he reared the reeking towers of Thangorodrim; and 
the gates of Morgoth were but one hundred and fifty leagues distant from the 
bridge of Menegroth; far and yet all too near. 

Now the Ores that multiplied in the darkness of the earth grew strong and fell, 
and their dark lord filled them with a lust of ruin and death; and they issued from 
Angband’s gates under the clouds that Morgoth sent forth, and passed silently 
into the highlands of the north. Thence on a sudden a great army came into 
Beleriand and assailed King Thingol. Now in his wide realm many Elves 
wandered free in the wild, or dwelt at peace in small kindreds far sundered; and 
only about Menegroth in the midst of the land, and along the Falas in the country 
of the mariners, were there numerous peoples. But the Ores came down upon 
either side of Menegroth, and from camps in the east between Celon and Gelion, 



and west in the plains between Sirion and Narog, they plundered far and wide; 
and Thingol was cut off from Cirdan at Eglarest. Therefore he called upon 
Denethor; and the Elves came in force from Region beyond Aros and from 
Ossiriand, and fought the first battle in the Wars of Beleriand. And the eastern 
host of the Ores was taken between the armies of the Eldar, north of the Andram 
and midway between Aros and Gelion, and there they were utterly defeated, and 
those that fled north from the great slaughter were waylaid by the axes of the 
Naugrim that issued from Mount Dolmed: few indeed returned to Angband. 

But the victory of the Elves was dear-bought. For those of Ossiriand were 
light-armed, and no match for the Ores, who were shod with iron and iron- 
shielded and bore great spears with broad blades; and Denethor was cut off and 
surrounded upon the hill of Amon Ereb. There he fell and all his nearest kin 
about him, before the host of Thingol could come to his aid. Bitterly though his 
fall was avenged, when Thingol came upon the rear of the Ores and slew them in 
heaps, his people lamented him ever after and took no king again. After the 
battle some returned to Ossiriand, and their tidings filled the remnant of their 
people with great fear, so that thereafter they came never forth in open war, but 
kept themselves by wariness and secrecy; and they were called the Laiquendi, 
the Green-elves, because of their raiment of the colour of leaves. But many went 
north and entered the guarded realm of Thingol, and were merged with his 
people. 

And when Thingol came again to Menegroth he learned that the Ore-host in 
the west was victorious, and had driven Cirdan to the rim of the sea. Therefore 
he withdrew all his people that his summons could reach within the fastness of 
Neldoreth and Region, and Melian put forth her power and fenced all that 
dominion round about with an unseen wall of shadow and bewilderment: the 
Girdle of Melian, that none thereafter could pass against her will or the will of 
King Thingol, unless one should come with a power greater than that of Melian 
the Maia. And this inner land, which was long named Eglador, was after called 
Doriath, the guarded kingdom, Land of the Girdle. Within it there was yet a 
watchful peace; but without there was peril and great fear, and the servants of 
Morgoth roamed at will, save in the walled havens of the Falas. 

But new tidings were at hand, which none in Middle-earth had foreseen, 
neither Morgoth in his pits nor Melian in Menegroth; for no news came out of 
Aman, whether by messenger, or by spirit, or by vision in dream, after the death 
of the Trees. In this same time Feanor came over the Sea in the white ships of the 
Teleri, and landed in the Firth of Drengist, and there burned the ships at Losgar. 



CHAPTER 11 



OF THE SUN AND MOON AND THE HIDING OF VALINOR 


It is told that after the flight of Melkor the Valar sat long unmoved upon their 
thrones in the Ring of Doom; but they were not idle, as Feanor declared in the 
folly of his heart. For the Valar may work many things with thought rather than 
with hands, and without voices in silence they may hold council one with 
another. Thus they held vigil in the night of Valinor, and their thought passed 
back beyond Ea and forth to the End; yet neither power nor wisdom assuaged 
their grief, and the knowing of evil in the hour of its being. And they mourned 
not more for the death of the Trees than for the marring of Feanor: of the works 
of Melkor one of the most evil. For Feanor was made the mightiest in all parts of 
body and mind, in valour, in endurance, in beauty, in understanding, in skill, in 
strength and in subtlety alike, of all the Children of Iluvatar, and a bright flame 
was in him. The works of wonder for the glory of Arda that he might otherwise 
have wrought only Manwe might in some measure conceive. And it was told by 
the Vanyar who held vigil with the Valar that when the messengers declared to 
Manwe the answers of Feanor to his heralds, Manwe wept and bowed his head. 
But at that last word of Feanor: that at the least the Noldor should do deeds to 
live in song for ever, he raised his head, as one that hears a voice far off, and he 
said: ‘So shall it be! Dear-bought those songs shall be accounted, and yet shall 
be well-bought. For the price could be no other. Thus even as Eru spoke to us 
shall beauty not before conceived be brought into Ea, and evil yet be good to 
have been.’ 

But Mandos said: ‘And yet remain evil. To me shall Feanor come soon.’ 


But when at last the Valar learned that the Noldor had indeed passed out of 
Aman and were come back into Middle-earth, they arose and began to set forth 
in deeds those counsels which they had taken in thought for the redress of the 
evils of Melkor. Then Manwe bade Yavanna and Nienna to put forth all their 
powers of growth and healing; and they put forth all their powers upon the Trees. 
But the tears of Nienna availed not to heal their mortal wounds; and for a long 
while Yavanna sang alone in the shadows. Yet even as hope failed and her song 
faltered, Telperion bore at last upon a leafless bough one great flower of silver, 
and Laurelin a single fruit of gold. 

These Yavanna took; and then the Trees died, and their lifeless stems stand yet 
in Valinor, a memorial of vanished joy. But the flower and the fruit Yavanna 
gave to Aule, and Manwe hallowed them, and Aule and his people made vessels 



to hold them and preserve their radiance: as is said in the Narsilion, the Song of 
the Sun and Moon. These vessels the Valar gave to Varda, that they might 
become lamps of heaven, outshining the ancient stars, being nearer to Arda; and 
she gave them power to traverse the lower regions of Ilmen, and set them to 
voyage upon appointed courses above the girdle of the Earth from the West unto 
the East and to return. 

These things the Valar did, recalling in their twilight the darkness of the lands 
of Arda; and they resolved now to illumine Middle-earth and with light to hinder 
the deeds of Melkor. For they remembered the Avari that remained by the waters 
of their awakening, and they did not utterly forsake the Noldor in exile; and 
Manwe knew also that the hour of the coming of Men was drawn nigh. And it is 
said indeed that, even as the Valar made war upon Melkor for the sake of the 
Quendi, so now for that time they forbore for the sake of the Hildor, the 
Aftercomers, the younger Children of Iluvatar. For so grievous had been the 
hurts of Middle-earth in the war upon Utumno that the Valar feared lest even 
worse should now befall; whereas the Hildor should be mortal, and weaker than 
the Quendi to withstand fear and tumult. Moreover it was not revealed to Manwe 
where the beginning of Men should be, north, south, or east. Therefore the Valar 
sent forth light, but made strong the land of their dwelling. 

Isil the Sheen the Vanyar of old named the Moon, flower of Telperion in 
Valinor; and Anar the Fire-golden, fruit of Faurelin, they named the Sun. But the 
Noldor named them also Rana, the Wayward, and Vasa, the Heart of Fire, that 
awakens and consumes; for the Sun was set as a sign for the awakening of Men 
and the waning of the Elves, but the Moon cherishes their memory. 

The maiden whom the Valar chose from among the Maiar to guide the vessel 
of the Sun was named Arien, and he that steered the island of the Moon was 
Tilion. In the days of the Trees Arien had tended the golden flowers in the 
gardens of Vana, and watered them with the bright dews of Faurelin; but Tilion 
was a hunter of the company of Orome, and he had a silver bow. He was a lover 
of silver, and when he would rest he forsook the woods of Orome, and going into 
Forien he lay in dream by the pools of Este, in Telperion’s flickering beams; and 
he begged to be given the task of tending for ever the last Flower of Silver. Arien 
the maiden was mightier than he, and she was chosen because she had not feared 
the heats of Faurelin, and was unhurt by them, being from the beginning a spirit 
of fire, whom Melkor had not deceived nor drawn to his service. Too bright were 
the eyes of Arien for even the Eldar to look on, and leaving Valinor she forsook 
the form and raiment which like the Valar she had worn there, and she was as a 
naked flame, terrible in the fullness of her splendour. 

Isil was first wrought and made ready, and first rose into the realm of the stars, 



and was the elder of the new lights, as was Telperion of the Trees. Then for a 
while the world had moonlight, and many things stirred and woke that had 
waited long in the sleep of Yavanna. The servants of Morgoth were filled with 
amazement, but the Elves of the Outer Lands looked up in delight; and even as 
the Moon rose above the darkness in the west, Fingolfin let blow his silver 
trumpets and began his march into Middle-earth, and the shadows of his host 
went long and black before them. 

Tilion had traversed the heaven seven times, and thus was in the furthest east, 
when the vessel of Arien was made ready. Then Anar arose in glory, and the first 
dawn of the Sun was like a great fire upon the towers of the Pelori: the clouds of 
Middle-earth were kindled, and there was heard the sound of many waterfalls. 
Then indeed Morgoth was dismayed, and he descended into the uttermost depths 
of Angband, and withdrew his servants, sending forth great reek and dark cloud 
to hide his land from the light of the Daystar. 

Now Varda purposed that the two vessels should journey in Ilmen and ever be 
aloft, but not together; each should pass from Valinor into the east and return, the 
one issuing from the west as the other turned from the east. Thus the first of the 
new days were reckoned after the manner of the Trees, from the mingling of the 
lights when Arien and Tilion passed in their courses, above the middle of the 
Earth. But Tilion was wayward and uncertain in speed, and held not to his 
appointed path; and he sought to come near to Arien, being drawn by her 
splendour, though the flame of Anar scorched him, and the island of the Moon 
was darkened. 

Because of the waywardness of Tilion, therefore, and yet more because of the 
prayers of Lorien and Este, who said that sleep and rest had been banished from 
the Earth, and the stars were hidden, Varda changed her counsel, and allowed a 
time wherein the world should still have shadow and half-light. Anar rested 
therefore a while in Valinor, lying upon the cool bosom of the Outer Sea; and 
Evening, the time of the descent and resting of the Sun, was the hour of greatest 
light and joy in Aman. But soon the Sun was drawn down by the servants of 
Ulmo, and went then in haste under the Earth, and so came unseen to the east 
and there mounted the heaven again, lest night be over-long and evil walk under 
the Moon. But by Anar the waters of the Outer Sea were made hot and glowed 
with coloured fire, and Valinor had light for a while after the passing of Arien. 
Yet as she journeyed under the Earth and drew towards the east the glow faded 
and Valinor was dim, and the Valar mourned then most for the death of Laurelin. 
At dawn the shadows of the Mountains of Defence lay heavy on the Blessed 
Realm. 

Varda commanded the Moon to journey in like manner, and passing under 



Earth to arise in the east, but only after the Sun had descended from heaven. But 
Tilion went with uncertain pace, as yet he goes, and was still drawn towards 
Arien, as he shall ever be; so that often both may be seen above the Earth 
together, or at times it will chance that he comes so nigh that his shadow cuts off 
her brightness and there is a darkness amid the day. 

Therefore by the coming and going of Anar the Valar reckoned the days 
thereafter until the Change of the World. For Tilion tarried seldom in Valinor, but 
more often would pass swiftly over the western land, over Avathar, or Araman, 
or Valinor, and plunge in the chasm beyond the Outer Sea, pursuing his way 
alone amid the grots and caverns at the roots of Arda. There he would often 
wander long, and late would return. 

Still therefore, after the Long Night, the light of Valinor was greater and fairer 
than upon Middle-earth; for the Sun rested there, and the lights of heaven drew 
nearer to Earth in that region. But neither the Sun nor the Moon can recall the 
light that was of old, that came from the Trees before they were touched by the 
poison of Ungoliant. That light lives now in the Silmarils alone. 

But Morgoth hated the new lights, and was for a while confounded by this 
unlooked-for stroke of the Valar. Then he assailed Tilion, sending spirits of 
shadow against him, and there was strife in Ilmen beneath the paths of the stars; 
but Tilion was victorious. And Arien Morgoth feared with a great fear, but dared 
not come nigh her, having indeed no longer the power; for as he grew in malice, 
and sent forth from himself the evil that he conceived in lies and creatures of 
wickedness, his might passed into them and was dispersed, and he himself 
became ever more bound to the earth, unwilling to issue from his dark 
strongholds. With shadows he hid himself and his servants from Arien, the 
glance of whose eyes they could not long endure; and the lands near his dwelling 
were shrouded in fumes and great clouds. 


But seeing the assault upon Tilion the Valar were in doubt, fearing what the 
malice and cunning of Morgoth might yet contrive against them. Being 
unwilling to make war upon him in Middle-earth, they remembered nonetheless 
the ruin of Almaren; and they resolved that the like should not befall Valinor. 
Therefore at that time they fortified their land anew, and they raised up the 
mountain-walls of the Pelori to sheer and dreadful heights, east, north, and south. 
Their outer sides were dark and smooth, without foothold or ledge, and they fell 
in great precipices with faces hard as glass, and rose up to towers with crowns of 
white ice. A sleepless watch was set upon them, and no pass led through them, 
save only at the Calacirya: but that pass the Valar did not close, because of the 



Eldar that were faithful, and in the city of Tirion upon the green hill Finarfin yet 
ruled the remnant of the Noldor in the deep cleft of the mountains. For all those 
of elven-race, even the Vanyar and Ingwe their lord, must breathe at times the 
outer air and the wind that comes over the sea from the lands of their birth; and 
the Valar would not sunder the Teleri wholly from their kin. But in the Calacirya 
they set strong towers and many sentinels, and at its issue upon the plains of 
Valmar a host was encamped, so that neither bird nor beast nor elf nor man, nor 
any creature beside that dwelt in Middle-earth, could pass that leaguer. 

And in that time also, which songs call Nurtale Valinoreva, the Hiding of 
Valinor, the Enchanted Isles were set, and all the seas about them were filled 
with shadows and bewilderment. And these isles were strung as a net in the 
Shadowy Seas from the north to the south, before Tol Eressea, the Lonely Isle, is 
reached by one sailing west. Hardly might any vessel pass between them, for in 
the dangerous sounds the waves sighed for ever upon dark rocks shrouded in 
mist. And in the twilight a great weariness came upon mariners and a loathing of 
the sea; but all that ever set foot upon the islands were there entrapped, and slept 
until the Change of the World. Thus it was that as Mandos foretold to them in 
Araman the Blessed Realm was shut against the Noldor; and of the many 
messengers that in after days sailed into the West none came ever to Valinor— 
save one only: the mightiest mariner of song. 











CHAPTER 12 



OF MEN 


The Valar sat now behind their mountains at peace; and having given light to 
Middle-earth they left it for long untended, and the lordship of Morgoth was 
uncontested save by the valour of the Noldor. Most in mind Ulmo kept the 
exiles, who gathered news of the Earth through all the waters. 

From this time forth were reckoned the Years of the Sun. Swifter and briefer 
are they than the long Years of the Trees in Valinor. In that time the air of 
Middle-earth became heavy with the breath of growth and mortality, and the 
changing and ageing of all things was hastened exceedingly; life teemed upon 
the soil and in the waters in the Second Spring of Arda, and the Eldar increased, 
and beneath the new Sun Beleriand grew green and fair. 


At the first rising of the Sun the Younger Children of Iluvatar awoke in the 
land of Hildorien in the eastward regions of Middle-earth; but the first Sun arose 
in the West, and the opening eyes of Men were turned towards it, and their feet 
as they wandered over the Earth for the most part strayed that way. The Atani 
they were named by the Eldar, the Second People; but they called them also 
Hildor, the Followers, and many other names: Apanonar, the After-born, 
Engwar, the Sickly, and Firimar, the Mortals; and they named them the Usurpers, 
the Strangers, and the Inscrutable, the Self-cursed, the Heavy-handed, the Night- 
fearers, the Children of the Sun. Of Men little is told in these tales, which 
concern the Eldest Days before the waxing of mortals and the waning of the 
Elves, save of those fathers of men, the Atanatari, who in the first years of the 
Sun and Moon wandered into the North of the world. To Hildorien there came no 
Vala to guide Men, or to summon them to dwell in Valinor; and Men have feared 
the Valar, rather than loved them, and have not understood the purposes of the 
Powers, being at variance with them, and at strife with the world. Ulmo 
nonetheless took thought for them, aiding the counsel and will of Manwe; and 
his messages came often to them by stream and flood. But they have not skill in 
such matters, and still less had they in those days before they had mingled with 
the Elves. Therefore they loved the waters, and their hearts were stirred, but they 
understood not the messages. Yet it is told that ere long they met Dark Elves in 
many places, and were befriended by them; and Men became the companions 
and disciples in their childhood of these ancient folk, wanderers of the Elven- 
race who never set out upon the paths to Valinor, and knew of the Valar only as a 
rumour and a distant name. 



Morgoth had then not long come back into Middle-earth, and his power went 
not far abroad, and was moreover checked by the sudden coming of great light. 
There was little peril in the lands and hills; and there new things, devised long 
ages before in the thought of Yavanna and sown as seed in the dark, came at last 
to their budding and their bloom. West, North, and South the children of Men 
spread and wandered, and their joy was the joy of the morning before the dew is 
dry, when every leaf is green. 

But the dawn is brief and the day full often belies its promise; and now the 
time drew on to the great wars of the powers of the North, when Noldor and 
Sindar and Men strove against the hosts of Morgoth Bauglir, and went down in 
ruin. To this end the cunning lies of Morgoth that he sowed of old, and sowed 
ever anew among his foes, and the curse that came of the slaying at Alqualonde, 
and the oath of Feanor, were ever at work. Only a part is here told of the deeds of 
those days, and most is said of the Noldor, and the Silmarils, and the mortals that 
became entangled in their fate. In those days Elves and Men were of like stature 
and strength of body, but the Elves had greater wisdom, and skill, and beauty; 
and those who had dwelt in Valinor and looked upon the Powers as much 
surpassed the Dark Elves in these things as they in turn surpassed the people of 
mortal race. Only in the realm of Doriath, whose queen Melian was of the 
kindred of Valar, did the Sindar come near to match the Calaquendi of the 
Blessed Realm. 

Immortal were the Elves, and their wisdom waxed from age to age, and no 
sickness nor pestilence brought death to them. Their bodies indeed were of the 
stuff of Earth, and could be destroyed; and in those days they were more like to 
the bodies of Men, since they had not so long been inhabited by the fire of their 
spirit, which consumes them from within in the courses of time. But Men were 
more frail, more easily slain by weapon or mischance, and less easily healed; 
subject to sickness and many ills; and they grew old and died. What may befall 
their spirits after death the Elves know not. Some say that they too go to the halls 
of Mandos; but their place of waiting there is not that of the Elves, and Mandos 
under Iluvatar alone save Manwe knows whither they go after the time of 
recollection in those silent halls beside the Outer Sea. None have ever come back 
from the mansions of the dead, save only Beren son of Barahir, whose hand had 
touched a Silmaril; but he never spoke afterward to mortal Men. The fate of Men 
after death, maybe, is not in the hands of the Valar, nor was all foretold in the 
Music of the Ainur. 

In after days, when because of the triumph of Morgoth Elves and Men became 
estranged, as he most wished, those of the Elven-race that lived still in Middle- 
earth waned and faded, and Men usurped the sunlight. Then the Quendi 



wandered in the lonely places of the great lands and the isles, and took to the 
moonlight and the starlight, and to the woods and caves, becoming as shadows 
and memories, save those who ever and anon set sail into the West and vanished 
from Middle-earth. But in the dawn of years Elves and Men were allies and held 
themselves akin, and there were some among Men that learned the wisdom of 
the Eldar, and became great and valiant among the captains of the Noldor. And 
in the glory and beauty of the Elves, and in their fate, full share had the offspring 
of elf and mortal, Earendil, and Elwing, and Elrond their child. 



CHAPTER 13 



OF THE RETURN OF THE NOLDOR 


It has been told that Feanor and his sons came first of the Exiles to Middle-earth, 
and landed in the waste of Lammoth, the Great Echo, upon the outer shores of 
the Firth of Drengist. And even as the Noldor set foot upon the strand their cries 
were taken up into the hills and multiplied, so that a clamour as of countless 
mighty voices filled all the coasts of the North; and the noise of the burning of 
the ships at Losgar went down the winds of the sea as a tumult of great wrath, 
and far away all who heard that sound were filled with wonder. 

Now the flames of that burning were seen not only by Fingolfin, whom 
Feanor had deserted in Araman, but also by the Ores and the watchers of 
Morgoth. No tale has told what Morgoth thought in his heart at the tidings that 
Feanor, his bitterest foe, had brought a host out of the West. It may be that he 
feared him little, for he had as yet no proof of the swords of the Noldor; and 
soon it was seen that he purposed to drive them back into the sea. 

Under the cold stars before the rising of the Moon the host of Feanor went up 
the long Firth of Drengist that pierced the Echoing Hills of Ered Lomin, and 
passed thus from the shores into the great land of Hithlum; and they came at 
length to the long lake of Mithrim, and upon its northern shore made their 
encampment in the region that bore the same name. But the host of Morgoth, 
aroused by the tumult of Lammoth and the light of the burning at Losgar, came 
through the passes of Ered Wethrin, the Mountains of Shadow, and assailed 
Feanor on a sudden, before his camp was full-wrought or put in defence; and 
there on the grey fields of Mithrim was fought the Second Battle in the Wars of 
Beleriand. Dagor-nuin-Giliath it is named, the Battle-under-Stars, for the Moon 
had not yet risen; and it is renowned in song. The Noldor, outnumbered and 
taken at unawares, were yet swiftly victorious; for the light of Aman was not yet 
dimmed in their eyes, and they were strong and swift, and deadly in anger, and 
their swords were long and terrible. The Ores fled before them, and they were 
driven forth from Mithrim with great slaughter, and hunted over the Mountains 
of Shadow into the great plain of Ard-galen, that lay northward of Dorthonion. 
There the armies of Morgoth that had passed south into the Vale of Sirion and 
beleaguered Cirdan in the Havens of the Falas came up to their aid, and were 
caught in their ruin. For Celegorm, Feanor’s son, having news of them, waylaid 
them with a part of the Elven-host, and coming down upon them out of the hills 
near Eithel Sirion drove them into the Fen of Serech. Evil indeed were the 
tidings that came at last to Angband, and Morgoth was dismayed. Ten days that 
battle lasted, and from it returned of all the hosts that he had prepared for the 



conquest of Beleriand no more than a handful of leaves. 

Yet cause he had for great joy, though it was hidden from him for a while. For 
Feanor, in his wrath against the Enemy, would not halt, but pressed on behind 
the remnant of the Ores, thinking so to come at Morgoth himself; and he laughed 
aloud as he wielded his sword, rejoicing that he had dared the wrath of the Valar 
and the evils of the road, that he might see the hour of his vengeance. Nothing 
did he know of Angband or the great strength of defence that Morgoth had so 
swiftly prepared; but even had he known it would not have deterred him, for he 
was fey, consumed by the flame of his own wrath. Thus it was that he drew far 
ahead of the van of his host; and seeing this the servants of Morgoth turned to 
bay, and there issued from Angband Balrogs to aid them. There upon the 
confines of Dor Daedeloth, the land of Morgoth, Feanor was surrounded, with 
few friends about him. Long he fought on, and undismayed, though he was 
wrapped in fire and wounded with many wounds; but at the last he was smitten 
to the ground by Gothmog, Lord of Balrogs, whom Ecthelion after slew in 
Gondolin. There he would have perished, had not his sons in that moment come 
up with force to his aid; and the Balrogs left him, and departed to Angband. 

Then his sons raised up their father and bore him back towards Mithrim. But 
as they drew near to Eithel Sirion and were upon the upward path to the pass 
over the mountains, Feanor bade them halt; for his wounds were mortal, and he 
knew that his hour was come. And looking out from the slopes of Ered Wethrin 
with his last sight he beheld far off the peaks of Thangorodrim, mightiest of the 
towers of Middle-earth, and knew with the foreknowledge of death that no 
power of the Noldor would ever overthrow them; but he cursed the name of 
Morgoth thrice, and laid it upon his sons to hold to their oath, and to avenge their 
father. Then he died; but he had neither burial nor tomb, for so fiery was his 
spirit that as it sped his body fell to ash, and was borne away like smoke; and his 
likeness has never again appeared in Arda, neither has his spirit left the halls of 
Mandos. Thus ended the mightiest of the Noldor, of whose deeds came both 
their greatest renown and their most grievous woe. 

Now in Mithrim there dwelt Grey-elves, folk of Beleriand that had wandered 
north over the mountains, and the Noldor met them with gladness, as kinsfolk 
long sundered; but speech at first was not easy between them, for in their long 
severance the tongues of the Calaquendi in Valinor and of the Moriquendi in 
Beleriand had drawn far apart. From the Elves of Mithrim the Noldor learned of 
the power of Elu Thingol, King in Doriath, and the girdle of enchantment that 
fenced his realm; and tidings of these great deeds in the north came south to 
Menegroth, and to the havens of Brithombar and Eglarest. Then all the Elves of 
Beleriand were filled with wonder and with hope at the coming of their mighty 



kindred, who thus returned unlooked-for from the West in the very hour of their 
need, believing indeed at first that they came as emissaries of the Valar to deliver 
them. 

But even in the hour of the death of Feanor an embassy came to his sons from 
Morgoth, acknowledging defeat, and offering terms, even to the surrender of a 
Silmaril. Then Maedhros the tall, the eldest son, persuaded his brothers to feign 
to treat with Morgoth, and to meet his emissaries at the place appointed; but the 
Noldor had as little thought of faith as had he. Wherefore each embassy came 
with greater force than was agreed; but Morgoth sent the more, and there were 
Balrogs. Maedhros was ambushed, and all his company were slain; but he 
himself was taken alive by the command of Morgoth, and brought to Angband. 

Then the brothers of Maedhros drew back, and fortified a great camp in 
Hithlum; but Morgoth held Maedhros as hostage, and sent word that he would 
not release him unless the Noldor would forsake their war, returning into the 
West, or else departing far from Beleriand into the South of the world. But the 
sons of Feanor knew that Morgoth would betray them, and would not release 
Maedhros, whatsoever they might do; and they were constrained also by their 
oath, and might not for any cause forsake the war against their Enemy. Therefore 
Morgoth took Maedhros and hung him from the face of a precipice upon 
Thangorodrim, and he was caught to the rock by the wrist of his right hand in a 
band of steel. 


Now rumour came to the camp in Hithlum of the march of Fingolfin and those 
that followed him, who had crossed the Grinding Ice; and all the world lay then 
in wonder at the coming of the Moon. But as the host of Fingolfin marched into 
Mithrim the Sun rose flaming in the West; and Fingolfin unfurled his blue and 
silver banners, and blew his horns, and flowers sprang beneath his marching 
feet, and the ages of the stars were ended. At the uprising of the great light the 
servants of Morgoth fled into Angband, and Fingolfin passed unopposed through 
the fastness of Dor Daedeloth while his foes hid beneath the earth. Then the 
Elves smote upon the gates of Angband, and the challenge of their trumpets 
shook the towers of Thangorodrim; and Maedhros heard them amid his torment 
and cried aloud, but his voice was lost in the echoes of the stone. 

But Fingolfin, being of other temper than Feanor, and wary of the wiles of 
Morgoth, withdrew from Dor Daedeloth and turned back towards Mithrim, for 
he had heard tidings that there he should find the sons of Feanor, and he desired 
also to have the shield of the Mountains of Shadow while his people rested and 
grew strong; for he had seen the strength of Angband, and thought not that it 



would fall to the sound of trumpets only. Therefore coming at length to Hithlum 
he made his first camp and dwelling by the northern shores of Lake Mithrim. No 
love was there in the hearts of those that followed Fingolfin for the House of 
Feanor, for the agony of those that endured the crossing of the Ice had been 
great, and Fingolfin held the sons the accomplices of their father. Then there was 
peril of strife between the hosts; but grievous as were their losses upon the road, 
the people of Fingolfin and of Finrod son of Finarfin were still more numerous 
than the followers of Feanor, and these now withdrew before them, and removed 
their dwelling to the southern shore; and the lake lay between them. Many of 
Feanor’s people indeed repented of the burning at Losgar, and were filled with 
amazement at the valour that had brought the friends whom they had abandoned 
over the Ice of the North; and they would have welcomed them, but they dared 
not, for shame. 

Thus because of the curse that lay upon them the Noldor achieved nothing, 
while Morgoth hesitated, and the dread of light was new and strong upon the 
Ores. But Morgoth arose from thought, and seeing the division of his foes he 
laughed. In the pits of Angband he caused vast smokes and vapours to be made, 
and they came forth from the reeking tops of the Iron Mountains, and afar off 
they could be seen in Mithrim, staining the bright airs in the first mornings of the 
world. A wind came out of the east, and bore them over Hithlum, darkening the 
new Sun; and they fell, and coiled about the fields and hollows, and lay upon the 
waters of Mithrim, drear and poisonous. 

Then Fingon the valiant, son of Fingolfin, resolved to heal the feud that 
divided the Noldor, before their Enemy should be ready for war; for the earth 
trembled in the Northlands with the thunder of the forges of Morgoth 
underground. Long before, in the bliss of Valinor, before Melkor was unchained, 
or lies came between them, Fingon had been close in friendship with Maedhros; 
and though he knew not yet that Maedhros had not forgotten him at the burning 
of the ships, the thought of their ancient friendship stung his heart. Therefore he 
dared a deed which is justly renowned among the feats of the princes of the 
Noldor: alone, and without the counsel of any, he set forth in search of 
Maedhros; and aided by the very darkness that Morgoth had made he came 
unseen into the fastness of his foes. High upon the shoulders of Thangorodrim he 
climbed, and looked in despair upon the desolation of the land; but no passage or 
crevice could he find through which he might come within Morgoth’s 
stronghold. Then in defiance of the Ores, who cowered still in the dark vaults 
beneath the earth, he took his harp and sang a song of Valinor that the Noldor 
made of old, before strife was born among the sons of Finwe; and his voice rang 
in the mournful hollows that had never heard before aught save cries of fear and 



woe. 

Thus Fingon found what he sought. For suddenly above him far and faint his 
song was taken up, and a voice answering called to him. Maedhros it was that 
sang amid his torment. But Fingon climbed to the foot of the precipice where his 
kinsman hung, and then could go no further; and he wept when he saw the cruel 
device of Morgoth. Maedhros therefore, being in anguish without hope, begged 
Fingon to shoot him with his bow; and Fingon strung an arrow, and bent his bow. 
And seeing no better hope he cried to Manwe, saying: ‘O King to whom all birds 
are dear, speed now this feathered shaft, and recall some pity for the Noldor in 
their need!’ 

His prayer was answered swiftly. For Manwe to whom all birds are dear, and 
to whom they bring news upon Taniquetil from Middle-earth, had sent forth the 
race of Eagles, commanding them to dwell in the crags of the North, and to keep 
watch upon Morgoth; for Manwe still had pity for the exiled Elves. And the 
Eagles brought news of much that passed in those days to the sad ears of 
Manwe. Now, even as Fingon bent his bow, there flew down from the high airs 
Thorondor, King of Eagles, mightiest of all birds that have ever been, whose 
outstretched wings spanned thirty fathoms; and staying Fingon’s hand he took 
him up, and bore him to the face of the rock where Maedhros hung. But Fingon 
could not release the hell-wrought bond upon his wrist, nor sever it, nor draw it 
from the stone. Again therefore in his pain Maedhros begged that he would slay 
him; but Fingon cut off his hand above the wrist, and Thorondor bore them back 
to Mithrim. 

There Maedhros in time was healed; for the fire of life was hot within him, 
and his strength was of the ancient world, such as those possessed who were 
nurtured in Valinor. His body recovered from his torment and became hale, but 
the shadow of his pain was in his heart; and he lived to wield his sword with left 
hand more deadly than his right had been. By this deed Fingon won great 
renown, and all the Noldor praised him; and the hatred between the houses of 
Fingolfin and Feanor was assuaged. For Maedhros begged forgiveness for the 
desertion in Araman; and he waived his claim to kingship over all the Noldor, 
saying to Fingolfin: Tf there lay no grievance between us, lord, still the kingship 
would rightly come to you, the eldest here of the house of Finwe, and not the 
least wise.’ But to this his brothers did not all in their hearts agree. 

Therefore even as Mandos foretold the House of Feanor were called the 
Dispossessed, because the overlordship passed from it, the elder, to the house of 
Fingolfin, both in Elende and in Beleriand, and because also of the loss of the 
Silmarils. But the Noldor being again united set a watch upon the borders of Dor 
Daedeloth, and Angband was beleaguered from west, and south, and east; and 



they sent forth messengers far and wide to explore the countries of Beleriand, 
and to treat with the people that dwelt there. 

Now King Thingol welcomed not with a full heart the coming of so many 
princes in might out of the West, eager for new realms; and he would not open 
his kingdom, nor remove its girdle of enchantment, for wise with the wisdom of 
Melian he trusted not that the restraint of Morgoth would endure. Alone of the 
princes of the Noldor those of Finarfin’s house were suffered to pass within the 
confines of Doriath; for they could claim close kinship with King Thingol 
himself, since their mother was Earwen of Alqualonde, Olwe’s daughter. 

Angrod son of Finarfin was the first of the Exiles to come to Menegroth, as 
messenger of his brother Finrod, and he spoke long with the King, telling him of 
the deeds of the Noldor in the north, and of their numbers, and of the ordering of 
their force; but being true, and wisehearted, and thinking all griefs now forgiven, 
he spoke no word concerning the kinslaying, nor of the manner of the exile of 
the Noldor and the oath of Feanor. King Thingol hearkened to the words of 
Angrod; and ere he went he said to him: Thus shall you speak for me to those 
that sent you. In Hithlum the Noldor have leave to dwell, and in the highlands of 
Dorthonion, and in the lands east of Doriath that are empty and wild; but 
elsewhere there are many of my people, and I would not have them restrained of 
their freedom, still less ousted from their homes. Beware therefore how you 
princes of the West bear yourselves; for I am the Lord of Beleriand, and all who 
seek to dwell there shall hear my word. Into Doriath none shall come to abide 
but only such as I call as guests, or who seek me in great need.’ 

Now the lords of the Noldor held council in Mithrim, and thither came 
Angrod out of Doriath, bearing the message of King Thingol. Cold seemed its 
welcome to the Noldor, and the sons of Feanor were angered at the words; but 
Maedhros laughed, saying: ‘A king is he that can hold his own, or else his title is 
vain. Thingol does but grant us lands where his power does not run. Indeed 
Doriath alone would be his realm this day, but for the coming of the Noldor. 
Therefore in Doriath let him reign, and be glad that he has the sons of Finwe for 
his neighbours, not the Ores of Morgoth that we found. Elsewhere it shall go as 
seems good to us.’ 

But Caranthir, who loved not the sons of Finarfin, and was the harshest of the 
brothers and the most quick to anger, cried aloud: ‘Yea more! Let not the sons of 
Finarfin run hither and thither with their tales to this Dark Elf in his caves! Who 
made them our spokesmen to deal with him? And though they be come indeed to 
Beleriand, let them not so swiftly forget that their father is a lord of the Noldor, 
though their mother be of other kin.’ 

Then Angrod was wrathful and went forth from the council. Maedhros indeed 



rebuked Caranthir; but the greater part of the Noldor, of both followings, hearing 
his words were troubled in heart, fearing the fell spirit of the sons of Feanor that 
it seemed would ever be like to burst forth in rash word or violence. But 
Maedhros restrained his brothers, and they departed from the council, and soon 
afterwards they left Mithrim and went eastward beyond Aros to the wide lands 
about the Hill of Himring. That region was named thereafter the March of 
Maedhros; for northwards there was little defence of hill or river against assault 
from Angband. There Maedhros and his brothers kept watch, gathering all such 
people as would come to them, and they had few dealings with their kinsfolk 
westward, save at need. It is said indeed that Maedhros himself devised this plan, 
to lessen the chances of strife, and because he was very willing that the chief 
peril of assault should fall upon himself; and he remained for his part in 
friendship with the houses of Fingolfin and Finarfin, and would come among 
them at times for common counsel. Yet he also was bound by the oath, though it 
slept now for a time. 

Now the people of Caranthir dwelt furthest east beyond the upper waters of 
Gelion, about Lake Helevorn under Mount Rerir and to the southward; and they 
climbed the heights of Ered Luin and looked eastward in wonder, for wild and 
wide it seemed to them were the lands of Middle-earth. And thus it was that 
Caranthir’s people came upon the Dwarves, who after the onslaught of Morgoth 
and the coming of the Noldor had ceased their traffic into Beleriand. But though 
either people loved skill and were eager to learn, no great love was there 
between them; for the Dwarves were secret and quick to resentment, and 
Caranthir was haughty and scarce concealed his scorn for the unloveliness of the 
Naugrim, and his people followed their lord. Nevertheless since both peoples 
feared and hated Morgoth they made alliance, and had of it great profit; for the 
Naugrim learned many secrets of craft in those days, so that the smiths and 
masons of Nogrod and Belegost became renowned among their kin, and when 
the Dwarves began again to journey into Beleriand all the traffic of the dwarf- 
mines passed first through the hands of Caranthir, and thus great riches came to 
him. 


When twenty years of the Sun had passed, Fingolfin King of the Noldor made 
a great feast; and it was held in the spring near to the pools of Ivrin, whence the 
swift river Narog rose, for there the lands were green and fair at the feet of the 
Mountains of Shadow that shielded them from the north. The joy of that feast 
was long remembered in later days of sorrow; and it was called Mereth 
Aderthad, the Feast of Reuniting. Thither came many of the chieftains and 



people of Fingolfin and Finrod; and of the sons of Feanor Maedhros and Maglor, 
with warriors of the eastern March; and there came also great numbers of the 
Grey-elves, wanderers of the woods of Beleriand and folk of the Havens, with 
Clrdan their lord. There came even Green-elves from Ossiriand, the Land of 
Seven Rivers, far off under the walls of the Blue Mountains; but out of Doriath 
there came but two messengers, Mablung and Daeron, bearing greetings from 
the King. 

At Mereth Aderthad many counsels were taken in good will, and oaths were 
sworn of league and friendship; and it is told that at this feast the tongue of the 
Grey-elves was most spoken even by the Noldor, for they learned swiftly the 
speech of Beleriand, whereas the Sindar were slow to master the tongue of 
Valinor. The hearts of the Noldor were high and full of hope, and to many among 
them it seemed that the words of Feanor had been justified, bidding them seek 
freedom and fair kingdoms in Middle-earth; and indeed there followed after long 
years of peace, while their swords fenced Beleriand from the ruin of Morgoth, 
and his power was shut behind his gates. In those days there was joy beneath the 
new Sun and Moon, and all the land was glad; but still the Shadow brooded in 
the north. 

And when again thirty years had passed, Turgon son of Fingolfin left Nevrast 
where he dwelt and sought out Finrod his friend upon the island of Tol Sirion, 
and they journeyed southward along the river, being weary for a while of the 
northern mountains; and as they journeyed night came upon them beyond the 
Meres of Twilight beside the waters of Sirion, and they slept upon his banks 
beneath the summer stars. But Ulmo coming up the river laid a deep sleep upon 
them and heavy dreams; and the trouble of the dreams remained after they 
awoke, but neither said aught to the other, for their memory was not clear, and 
each believed that Ulmo had sent a message to him alone. But unquiet was upon 
them ever after, and doubt of what should befall, and they wandered often alone 
in untrodden lands, seeking far and wide for places of hidden strength; for it 
seemed to each that he was bidden to prepare for a day of evil, and to establish a 
retreat, lest Morgoth should burst from Angband and overthrow the armies of the 
North. 

Now on a time Finrod and Galadriel his sister were the guests of Thingol their 
kinsman in Doriath. Then Finrod was filled with wonder at the strength and 
majesty of Menegroth, its treasuries and armouries and its many-pillared halls of 
stone; and it came into his heart that he would build wide halls behind ever- 
guarded gates in some deep and secret place beneath the hills. Therefore he 
opened his heart to Thingol, telling him of his dreams; and Thingol spoke to him 
of the deep gorge of the River Narog, and the caves under the High Faroth in its 



steep western shore, and when he departed he gave him guides to lead him to 
that place of which few yet knew. Thus Finrod came to the Caverns of Narog, 
and began to establish there deep halls and armouries after the fashion of the 
mansions of Menegroth; and that stronghold was called Nargothrond. In that 
labour Finrod was aided by the Dwarves of the Blue Mountains; and they were 
rewarded well, for Finrod had brought more treasures out of Tirion than any 
other of the princes of the Noldor. And in that time was made for him the 
Nauglamir, the Necklace of the Dwarves, most renowned of their works in the 
Elder Days. It was a carcanet of gold, and set therein were gems uncounted from 
Valinor; but it had a power within it so that it rested lightly on its wearer as a 
strand of flax, and whatsoever neck it clasped it sat always with grace and 
loveliness. 

There in Nargothrond Finrod made his home with many of his people, and he 
was named in the tongue of the Dwarves Felagund, Hewer of Caves; and that 
name he bore thereafter until his end. But Finrod Felagund was not the first to 
dwell in the caves beside the River Narog. 

Galadriel his sister went not with him to Nargothrond, for in Doriath dwelt 
Celeborn, kinsman of Thingol, and there was great love between them. 
Therefore she remained in the Hidden Kingdom, and abode with Melian, and of 
her learned great lore and wisdom concerning Middle-earth. 

But Turgon remembered the city set upon a hill, Tirion the fair with its tower 
and tree, and he found not what he sought, but returned to Nevrast, and sat in 
peace in Vinyamar by the shores of the sea. And in the next year Ulmo himself 
appeared to him, and bade him go forth again alone into the Vale of Sirion; and 
Turgon went forth, and by the guidance of Ulmo he discovered the hidden vale 
of Tumladen in the Encircling Mountains, in the midst of which there was a hill 
of stone. Of this he spoke to none as yet, but returned once more to Nevrast, and 
there began in his secret counsels to devise the plan of a city after the manner of 
Tirion upon Tuna, for which his heart yearned in exile. 

Now Morgoth, believing the report of his spies that the lords of the Noldor 
were wandering abroad with little thought of war, made trial of the strength and 
watchfulness of his enemies. Once more, with little warning, his might was 
stirred, and suddenly there were earthquakes in the north, and fire came from 
fissures in the earth, and the Iron Mountains vomited flame; and Ores poured 
forth across the plain of Ard-galen. Thence they thrust down the Pass of Sirion 
in the west, and in the east they burst through the land of Maglor, in the gap 
between the hills of Maedhros and the outliers of the Blue Mountains. But 
Fingolfin and Maedhros were not sleeping, and while others sought out the 
scattered bands of Ores that strayed in Beleriand and did great evil they came 



upon the main host from either side as it was assaulting Dorthonion; and they 
defeated the servants of Morgoth, and pursuing them across Ard-galen destroyed 
them utterly, to the least and last, within sight of Angband’s gates. That was the 
third great battle of the Wars of Beleriand, and it was named Dagor Aglareb, the 
Glorious Battle. 

A victory it was, and yet a warning; and the princes took heed of it, and 
thereafter drew closer their leaguer, and strengthened and ordered their watch, 
setting the Siege of Angband, which lasted wellnigh four hundred years of the 
Sun. For a long time after Dagor Aglareb no servant of Morgoth would venture 
from his gates, for they feared the lords of the Noldor; and Fingolfin boasted that 
save by treason among themselves Morgoth could never again burst from the 
leaguer of the Eldar, nor come upon them at unawares. Yet the Noldor could not 
capture Angband, nor could they regain the Silmarils; and war never wholly 
ceased in all that time of the Siege, for Morgoth devised new evils, and ever and 
anon he would make trial of his enemies. Nor could the stronghold of Morgoth 
be ever wholly encircled; for the Iron Mountains, from whose great curving wall 
the towers of Thangorodrim were thrust forward, defended it upon either side, 
and were impassable to the Noldor, because of their snow and ice. Thus in his 
rear and to the north Morgoth had no foes, and by that way his spies at times 
went out, and came by devious routes into Beleriand. And desiring above all to 
sow fear and disunion among the Eldar, he commanded the Ores to take alive 
any of them that they could and bring them bound to Angband; and some he so 
daunted by the terror of his eyes that they needed no chains more, but walked 
ever in fear of him, doing his will wherever they might be. Thus Morgoth 
learned much of all that had befallen since the rebellion of Feanor, and he 
rejoiced, seeing therein the seed of many dissensions among his foes. 














When nearly one hundred years had run since the Dagor Aglareb, Morgoth 
endeavoured to take Fingolfin at unawares (for he knew of the vigilance of 
Maedhros); and he sent forth an army into the white north, and they turned west 
and again south and came down the coasts to the Firth of Drengist, by the route 
that Fingolfin followed from the Grinding Ice. Thus they would enter into the 
realm of Hithlum from the west; but they were espied in time, and Fingon fell 
upon them among the hills at the head of the Firth, and most of the Ores were 
driven into the sea. This was not reckoned among the great battles, for the Ores 
were not in great number, and only a part of the people of Hithlum fought there. 
But thereafter there was peace for many years, and no open assault from 
Angband, for Morgoth perceived now that the Ores unaided were no match for 
the Noldor; and he sought in his heart for new counsel. 

Again after a hundred years Glaurung, the first of the Uruloki, the fire-drakes 
of the North, issued from Angband’s gates by night. He was yet young and 
scarce half-grown, for long and slow is the life of the dragons, but the Elves fled 
before him to Ered Wethrin and Dorthonion in dismay; and he defiled the fields 
of Ard-galen. Then Fingon prince of Hithlum rode against him with archers on 
horseback, and hemmed him round with a ring of swift riders; and Glaurung 
could not endure their darts, being not yet come to his full armoury, and he fled 
back to Angband, and came not forth again for many years. Fingon won great 
praise, and the Noldor rejoiced; for few foresaw the full meaning and threat of 
this new thing. But Morgoth was ill-pleased that Glaurung had disclosed himself 
oversoon; and after his defeat there was the Long Peace of wellnigh two hundred 
years. In all that time there were but affrays on the marches, and all Beleriand 
prospered and grew rich. Behind the guard of their armies in the north the 
Noldor built their dwellings and their towers, and many fair things they made in 
those days, and poems and histories and books of lore. In many parts of the land 
the Noldor and the Sindar became welded into one people, and spoke the same 
tongue; though this difference remained between them, that the Noldor had the 
greater power of mind and body, and were the mightier warriors and sages, and 
they built with stone, and loved the hill-slopes and open lands. But the Sindar 
had the fairer voices and were more skilled in music, save only Maglor son of 
Feanor, and they loved the woods and the riversides; and some of the Grey-elves 
still wandered far and wide without settled abode, and they sang as they went. 














CHAPTER 14 



OF BELERIAND AND ITS REALMS 


This is the fashion of the lands into which the Noldor came, in the north of the 
western regions of Middle-earth, in the ancient days; and here also is told of the 
manner in which the chieftains of the Eldar held their lands and the leaguer upon 
Morgoth after the Dagor Aglareb, the third battle in the Wars of Beleriand. 


In the north of the world Melkor had in the ages past reared Ered Engrin, the 
Iron Mountains, as a fence to his citadel of Utumno; and they stood upon the 
borders of the regions of everlasting cold, in a great curve from east to west. 
Behind the walls of Ered Engrin in the west, where they bent back northwards, 
Melkor built another fortress, as a defence against assault that might come from 
Valinor; and when he came back to Middle-earth, as has been told, he took up 
his abode in the endless dungeons of Angband, the Hells of Iron, for in the War 
of the Powers the Valar, in their haste to overthrow him in his great stronghold of 
Utumno, did not wholly destroy Angband nor search out all its deep places. 
Beneath Ered Engrin he made a great tunnel, which issued south of the 
mountains; and there he made a mighty gate. But above this gate, and behind it 
even to the mountains, he piled the thunderous towers of Thangorodrim, that 
were made of the ash and slag of his subterranean furnaces, and the vast refuse 
of his tunnellings. They were black and desolate and exceedingly lofty; and 
smoke issued from their tops, dark and foul upon the northern sky. Before the 
gates of Angband filth and desolation spread southward for many miles over the 
wide plain of Ard-galen; but after the coming of the Sun rich grass arose there, 
and while Angband was besieged and its gates shut there were green things even 
among the pits and broken rocks before the doors of hell. 

To the west of Thangorodrim lay Hisilome, the Land of Mist, for so it was 
named by the Noldor in their own tongue because of the clouds that Morgoth 
sent thither during their first encampment; Hithlum it became in the tongue of 
the Sindar that dwelt in those regions. It was a fair land while the Siege of 
Angband lasted, although its air was cool and winter there was cold. In the west 
it was bounded by Ered Lomin, the Echoing Mountains that marched near the 
sea; and in the east and south by the great curve of Ered Wethrin, the Shadowy 
Mountains, that looked across Ard-galen and the Vale of Sirion. 

Fingolfin and Fingon his son held Hithlum, and the most part of Fingolfin’s 
folk dwelt in Mithrim about the shores of the great lake; to Fingon was assigned 
Dor-lomin, that lay to the west of the Mountains of Mithrim. But their chief 



fortress was at Eithel Sirion in the east of Ered Wethrin, whence they kept watch 
upon Ard-galen; and their cavalry rode upon that plain even to the shadow of 
Thangorodrim, for from few their horses had increased swiftly, and the grass of 
Ard-galen was rich and green. Of those horses many of the sires came from 
Valinor, and they were given to Fingolfin by Maedhros in atonement of his 
losses, for they had been carried by ship to Losgar. 

West of Dor-lomin, beyond the Echoing Mountains, which south of the Firth 
of Drengist marched inland, lay Nevrast, that signifies the Hither Shore in the 
Sindarin tongue. That name was given at first to all the coastlands south of the 
Firth, but afterwards only to the land whose shores lay between Drengist and 
Mount Taras. There for many years was the realm of Turgon the wise, son of 
Fingolfin, bounded by the sea, and by Ered Fomin, and by the hills which 
continued the walls of Ered Wethrin westward, from Ivrin to Mount Taras, which 
stood upon a promontory. By some Nevrast was held to belong rather to 
Beleriand than to Hithlum, for it was a milder land, watered by the wet winds 
from the sea and sheltered from the cold north winds that blew over Hithlum. It 
was a hollow land, surrounded by mountains and great coast-cliffs higher than 
the plains behind, and no river flowed thence; and there was a great mere in the 
midst of Nevrast, with no certain shores, being encircled by wide marshes. 
Finaewen was the name of that mere, because of the multitude of birds that 
dwelt there, of such as love tall reeds and shallow pools. At the coming of the 
Noldor many of the Grey-elves lived in Nevrast near to the coasts, and especially 
about Mount Taras in the southwest; for to that place Ulmo and Osse had been 
wont to come in days of old. All that people took Turgon for their lord, and the 
mingling of the Noldor and the Sindar came to pass soonest there; and Turgon 
dwelt long in those halls that he named Vinyamar, under Mount Taras beside the 
sea. 

South of Ard-galen the great highland named Dorthonion stretched for sixty 
leagues from west to east; great pine forests it bore, especially on its northern 
and western sides. By gentle slopes from the plain it rose to a bleak and lofty 
land, where lay many tarns at the feet of bare tors whose heads were higher than 
the peaks of Ered Wethrin: but southward where it looked towards Doriath it fell 
suddenly in dreadful precipices. From the northern slopes of Dorthonion Angrod 
and Aegnor, sons of Finarfin, looked out over the fields of Ard-galen, and were 
the vassals of their brother Finrod, lord of Nargothrond; their people were few, 
for the land was barren, and the great highlands behind were deemed to be a 
bulwark that Morgoth would not lightly seek to cross. 

Between Dorthonion and the Shadowy Mountains there was a narrow vale, 
whose sheer walls were clad with pines; but the vale itself was green, for the 



River Sirion flowed through it, hastening towards Beleriand. Finrod held the 
Pass of Sirion, and upon the isle of Tol Sirion in the midst of the river he built a 
mighty watch-tower, Minas Tirith; but after Nargothrond was made he 
committed that fortress mostly to the keeping of Orodreth his brother. 

Now the great and fair country of Beleriand lay on either side of the mighty 
river Sirion, renowned in song, which rose at Eithel Sirion and skirted the edge 
of Ard-galen ere he plunged through the pass, becoming ever fuller with the 
streams of the mountains. Thence he flowed south for one hundred and thirty 
leagues, gathering the waters of many tributaries, until with a mighty flood he 
reached his many mouths and sandy delta in the Bay of Balar. And following 
Sirion from north to south there lay upon the right hand in West Beleriand the 
Forest of Brethil between Sirion and Teiglin, and then the realm of Nargothrond, 
between Teiglin and Narog. And the River Narog rose in the falls of Ivrin in the 
southern face of Dor-lomin, and flowed some eighty leagues ere he joined Sirion 
in Nan-tathren, the Land of Willows. South of Nan-tathren was a region of 
meads filled with many flowers, where few folk dwelt; and beyond lay the 
marshes and isles of reed about the mouths of Sirion, and the sands of his delta 
empty of all living things save birds of the sea. 

But the realm of Nargothrond extended also west of Narog to the River 
Nenning, that reached the sea at Eglarest; and Finrod became the overlord of all 
the Elves of Beleriand between Sirion and the sea, save only in the Falas. There 
dwelt those of the Sindar who still loved ships, and Cirdan the shipbuilder was 
their lord; but between Cirdan and Finrod there was friendship and alliance, and 
with the aid of the Noldor the havens of Brithombar and Eglarest were built 
anew. Behind their great walls they became fair towns and harbours with quays 
and piers of stone. Upon the cape west of Eglarest Finrod raised the tower of 
Barad Nimras to watch the western sea, though needlessly, as it proved; for at no 
time ever did Morgoth essay to build ships or to make war by sea. Water all his 
servants shunned, and to the sea none would willingly go nigh, save in dire need. 
With the aid of the Elves of the Havens some of the folk of Nargothrond built 
new ships, and they went forth and explored the great Isle of Balar, thinking 
there to prepare a last refuge, if evil came; but it was not their fate that they 
should ever dwell there. 

Thus the realm of Finrod was the greatest by far, though he was the youngest 
of the great lords of the Noldor, Fingolfin, Fingon, and Maedhros, and Finrod 
Felagund. But Fingolfin was held overlord of all the Noldor, and Fingon after 
him, though their own realm was but the northern land of Hithlum; yet their 
people were the most hardy and valiant, most feared by the Ores and most hated 
by Morgoth. 



Upon the left hand of Sirion lay East Beleriand, at its widest a hundred 
leagues from Sirion to Gelion and the borders of Ossiriand; and first, between 
Sirion and Mindeb, lay the empty land of Dimbar under the peaks of the 
Crissaegrim, abode of eagles. Between Mindeb and the upper waters of 
Esgalduin lay the no-land of Nan Dungortheb; and that region was filled with 
fear, for upon its one side the power of Melian fenced the north march of 
Doriath, but upon the other side the sheer precipices of Ered Gorgoroth, 
Mountains of Terror, fell down from high Dorthonion. Thither, as was earlier 
told, Ungoliant had fled from the whips of the Balrogs, and there she dwelt a 
while, filling the ravines with her deadly gloom, and there still, when she had 
passed away, her foul offspring lurked and wove their evil nets; and the thin 
waters that spilled from Ered Gorgoroth were defiled, and perilous to drink, for 
the hearts of those that tasted them were filled with shadows of madness and 
despair. All living things else shunned that land, and the Noldor would pass 
through Nan Dungortheb only at great need, by paths near to the borders of 
Doriath and furthest from the haunted hills. That way was made long before, in 
the time ere Morgoth returned to Middle-earth; and if one fared upon it he came 
eastwards to Esgalduin, where still there stood in the days of the Siege the stone 
bridge of Iant Iaur. Thence he passed through Dor Dinen, the Silent Land, and 
crossing the Arossiach (which signifies the Fords of Aros) came to the north 
marches of Beleriand, where dwelt the sons of Feanor. 

Southward lay the guarded woods of Doriath, abode of Thingol the Hidden 
King, into whose realm none passed save by his will. Its northern and lesser part, 
the Forest of Neldoreth, was bounded east and south by the dark river Esgalduin, 
which bent westward in the midst of the land; and between Aros and Esgalduin 
lay the denser and greater woods of Region. Upon the southern bank of 
Esgalduin, where it turned westward towards Sirion, were the Caves of 
Menegroth; and all Doriath lay east of Sirion save for a narrow region of 
woodland between the meeting of Teiglin and Sirion and the Meres of Twilight. 
By the people of Doriath this wood was called Nivrim, the West March; great 
oak-trees grew there, and it also was encompassed within the Girdle of Melian, 
that so some portion of Sirion which she loved in reverence of Ulmo should be 
wholly under the power of Thingol. 

In the south-west of Doriath, where Aros flowed into Sirion, lay great pools 
and marshes on either side of the river, which halted there in his course and 
strayed in many channels. That region was named Aelin-uial, the Twilight 
Meres, for they were wrapped in mists, and the enchantment of Doriath lay over 
them. Now all the northern part of Beleriand sloped southward to this point and 
then for a while was plain, and the flood of Sirion was stayed. But south of 



Aelin-uial the land fell suddenly and steeply; and all the lower fields of Sirion 
were divided from the upper fields by this fall, which to one looking from the 
south northward appeared as an endless chain of hills running from Eglarest 
beyond Narog in the west to Amon Ereb in the east, within far sight of Gelion. 
Narog came through these hills in a deep gorge, and flowed over rapids but had 
no fall, and on its western bank the land rose into the great wooded highlands of 
Tauren-Faroth. On the west side of this gorge, where the short and foaming 
stream Ringwil tumbled headlong into Narog from the High Faroth, Finrod 
established Nargothrond. But some twenty-five leagues east of the gorge of 
Nargothrond Sirion fell from the north in a mighty fall below the Meres, and 
then he plunged suddenly underground into great tunnels that the weight of his 
falling waters delved; and he issued again three leagues southward with great 
noise and smoke through rocky arches at the foot of the hills which were called 
the Gates of Sirion. 

This dividing fall was named Andram, the Fong Wall, from Nargothrond to 
Ramdal, the Wall’s End, in East Beleriand. But in the east it became ever less 
sheer, for the vale of Gelion sloped steadily southward, and Gelion had neither 
fall nor rapids throughout his course, but was ever swifter than was Sirion. 
Between Ramdal and Gelion there stood a single hill of great extent and gentle 
slopes, but seeming mightier than it was, for it stood alone; and that hill was 
named Amon Ereb. Upon Amon Ereb died Denethor, lord of the Nandor that 
dwelt in Ossiriand, who marched to the aid of Thingol against Morgoth in those 
days when the Ores first came down in force, and broke the starlit peace of 
Beleriand; and upon that hill Maedhros dwelt after the great defeat. But south of 
the Andram, between Sirion and Gelion, was a wild land of tangled forest in 
which no folk went, save here and there a few Dark Elves wandering; Taur-im- 
Duinath it was named, the Forest between the Rivers. 


Gelion was a great river; and he rose in two sources and had at first two 
branches: Little Gelion that came from the Hill of Himring, and Greater Gelion 
that came from Mount Rerir. From the meeting of his arms he flowed south for 
forty leagues before he found his tributaries; and before he found the sea he was 
twice as long as Sirion, though less wide and full, for more rain fell in Hithlum 
and Dorthonion, whence Sirion drew his waters, than in the east. From Ered 
Luin flowed the six tributaries of Gelion: Ascar (that was after named 
Rathloriel), Thalos, Legolin, Brilthor, Duilwen, and Adurant, swift and turbulent 
streams, falling steeply from the mountains; and between Ascar in the north and 
Adurant in the south, and between Gelion and Ered Luin, lay the far green 



country of Ossiriand, the Land of Seven Rivers. Now at a point nearly midway 
in its course the stream of Adurant divided and then joined again; and the island 
that its waters enclosed was named Tol Galen, the Green Isle. There Beren and 
Liithien dwelt after their return. 

In Ossiriand dwelt the Green-elves, in the protection of their rivers; for after 
Sirion Ulmo loved Gelion above all the waters of the western world. The 
woodcraft of the Elves of Ossiriand was such that a stranger might pass through 
their land from end to end and see none of them. They were clad in green in 
spring and summer, and the sound of their singing could be heard even across 
the waters of Gelion; wherefore the Noldor named that country Lindon, the land 
of music, and the mountains beyond they named Ered Lindon, for they first saw 
them from Ossiriand. 


East of Dorthonion the marches of Beleriand were most open to attack, and 
only hills of no great height guarded the vale of Gelion from the north. In that 
region, upon the March of Maedhros and in the lands behind, dwelt the sons of 
Feanor with many people; and their riders passed often over the vast northern 
plain, Lothlann the wide and empty, east of Ard-galen, lest Morgoth should 
attempt any sortie towards East Beleriand. The chief citadel of Maedhros was 
upon the Hill of Himring, the Ever-cold; and that was wide-shouldered, bare of 
trees, and flat upon its summit, surrounded by many lesser hills. Between 
Himring and Dorthonion there was a pass, exceeding steep upon the west, and 
that was the Pass of Aglon, and was a gate unto Doriath; and a bitter wind blew 
ever through it from the north. But Celegorm and Curufin fortified Aglon and 
held it with great strength, and all the land of Himlad southward between the 
River Aros that rose in Dorthonion and his tributary Celon that came from 
Himring. 

Between the arms of Gelion was the ward of Maglor, and here in one place the 
hills failed altogether; there it was that the Ores came into East Beleriand before 
the Third Battle. Therefore the Noldor held strength of cavalry in the plains at 
that place; and the people of Caranthir fortified the mountains to the east of 
Maglor’s Gap. There Mount Rerir, and about it many lesser heights, stood out 
from the main range of Ered Lindon westward; and in the angle between Rerir 
and Ered Lindon there was a lake, shadowed by mountains on all sides save the 
south. That was Lake Helevorn, deep and dark, and beside it Caranthir had his 
abode; but all the great land between Gelion and the mountains, and between 
Rerir and the River Ascar, was called by the Noldor Thargelion, which signifies 
the Land beyond Gelion, or Dor Caranthir, the Land of Caranthir; and it was here 



that the Noldor first met the Dwarves. But Thargelion was before called by the 
Grey-elves Talath Rhunen, the East Vale. 

Thus the sons of Feanor under Maedhros were the lords of East Beleriand, but 
their people were in that time mostly in the north of the land, and southward they 
rode only to hunt in the greenwoods. But there Amrod and Amras had their 
abode, and they came seldom northward while the Siege lasted; and there also 
other of the Elf-lords would ride at times, even from afar, for the land was wild 
but very fair. Of these Finrod Felagund came most often, for he had great love of 
wandering, and he came even into Ossiriand, and won the friendship of the 
Green-elves. But none of the Noldor went ever over Ered Lindon, while their 
realm lasted; and little news and late came into Beleriand of what passed in the 
regions of the East. 









CHAPTER 15 



OF THE NOLDQR IN BELERIAND 


It has been told how by the guidance of Ulmo Turgon of Nevrast discovered the 
hidden vale of Tumladen; and that (as was after known) lay east of the upper 
waters of Sirion, in a ring of mountains tall and sheer, and no living thing came 
there save the eagles of Thorondor. But there was a deep way under the 
mountains delved in the darkness of the world by waters that flowed out to join 
the streams of Sirion; and this way Turgon found, and so came to the green plain 
amid the mountains, and saw the island-hill that stood there of hard smooth 
stone; for the vale had been a great lake in ancient days. Then Turgon knew that 
he had found the place of his desire, and he resolved to build there a fair city, a 
memorial of Tirion upon Tuna; but he returned to Nevrast, and remained there in 
peace, though he pondered ever in his thought how he should accomplish his 
design. 

Now after the Dagor Aglareb the unquiet that Ulmo set in his heart returned to 
him, and he summoned many of the hardiest and most skilled of his people, and 
led them secretly to the hidden vale, and there they began the building of the city 
that Turgon had devised; and they set a watch all about it, that none might come 
upon their work from without, and the power of Ulmo that ran in Sirion 
protected them. But Turgon dwelt still for the most part in Nevrast, until it came 
to pass that at last the city was full-wrought, after two and fifty years of secret 
toil. It is said that Turgon appointed its name to be Ondolinde in the speech of 
the Elves of Valinor, the Rock of the Music of Water, for there were fountains 
upon the hill; but in the Sindarin tongue the name was changed, and it became 
Gondolin, the Hidden Rock. Then Turgon prepared to depart from Nevrast and 
leave his halls in Vinyamar beside the sea; and there Ulmo came to him once 
again, and spoke with him. And he said: ‘Now thou shalt go at last to Gondolin, 
Turgon; and I will maintain my power in the Vale of Sirion, and in all the waters 
therein, so that none shall mark thy going, nor shall any find there the hidden 
entrance against thy will. Longest of all the realms of the Eldalie shall Gondolin 
stand against Melkor. But love not too well the work of thy hands and the 
devices of thy heart; and remember that the true hope of the Noldor lieth in the 
West and cometh from the Sea.’ 

And Ulmo warned Turgon that he also lay under the Doom of Mandos, which 
Ulmo had no power to remove. ‘Thus it may come to pass,’ he said, ‘that the 
curse of the Noldor shall find thee too ere the end, and treason awake within thy 
walls. Then they shall be in peril of fire. But if this peril draweth nigh indeed, 
then even from Nevrast one shall come to warn thee, and from him beyond ruin 



and fire hope shall be born for Elves and Men. Leave therefore in this house 
arms and a sword, that in years to come he may find them, and thus shalt thou 
know him, and not be deceived.’ And Ulmo declared to Turgon of what kind and 
stature should be the helm and mail and sword that he left behind. 

Then Ulmo returned to the sea, and Turgon sent forth all his people, even to a 
third part of the Noldor of Fingolfin’s following, and a yet greater host of the 
Sindar; and they passed away, company by company, secretly, under the 
shadows of Ered Wethrin, and they came unseen to Gondolin, and none knew 
whither they had gone. And last of all Turgon arose, and went with his 
household silently through the hills, and passed the gates in the mountains, and 
they were shut behind him. 

Through many long years none passed inward thereafter, save Hurin and Huor 
only; and the host of Turgon came never forth again until the Year of 
Lamentation after three hundred and fifty years and more. But behind the circle 
of the mountains the people of Turgon grew and throve, and they put forth their 
skill in labour unceasing, so that Gondolin upon Amon Gwareth became fair 
indeed and fit to compare even with Elven Tirion beyond the sea. High and 
white were its walls, and smooth its stairs, and tall and strong was the Tower of 
the King. There shining fountains played, and in the courts of Turgon stood 
images of the Trees of old, which Turgon himself wrought with elven-craft; and 
the Tree which he made of gold was named Glingal, and the Tree whose flowers 
he made of silver was named Belthil. But fairer than all the wonders of Gondolin 
was Idril, Turgon’s daughter, she that was called Celebrindal, the Silver-foot, 
whose hair was as the gold of Laurelin before the coming of Melkor. Thus 
Turgon lived long in bliss; but Nevrast was desolate, and remained empty of 
living folk until the ruin of Beleriand. 


Now while the city of Gondolin was building in secret, Finrod Felagund 
wrought in the deep places of Nargothrond; but Galadriel his sister dwelt, as has 
been told, in Thingol’s realm in Doriath. And at times Melian and Galadriel 
would speak together of Valinor and the bliss of old; but beyond the dark hour of 
the death of the Trees Galadriel would not go, but ever fell silent. And on a time 
Melian said: There is some woe that lies upon you and your kin. That I can see 
in you, but all else is hidden from me; for by no vision or thought can I perceive 
anything that passed or passes in the West: a shadow lies over all the land of 
Aman, and reaches far out over the sea. Why will you not tell me more?’ 

Tor that woe is past,’ said Galadriel; ‘and I would take what joy is here left, 
untroubled by memory. And maybe there is woe enough yet to come, though still 



hope may seem bright.’ 

Then Melian looked in her eyes, and said: T believe not that the Noldor came 
forth as messengers of the Valar, as was said at first: not though they came in the 
very hour of our need. For they speak never of the Valar, nor have their high 
lords brought any message to Thingol, whether from Manwe, or Ulmo, or even 
from Olwe the King’s brother, and his own folk that went over the sea. For what 
cause, Galadriel, were the high people of the Noldor driven forth as exiles from 
Aman? Or what evil lies on the sons of Feanor that they are so haughty and so 
fell? Do I not strike near the truth?’ 

‘Near,’ said Galadriel; ‘save that we were not driven forth, but came of our 
own will, and against that of the Valar. And through great peril and in despite of 
the Valar for this purpose we came: to take vengeance upon Morgoth, and regain 
what he stole.’ 

Then Galadriel spoke to Melian of the Silmarils, and of the slaying of King 
Finwe at Formenos; but still she said no word of the Oath, nor of the Kinslaying, 
nor of the burning of the ships at Losgar. But Melian said: ‘Now much you tell 
me, and yet more I perceive. A darkness you would cast over the long road from 
Tirion, but I see evil there, which Thingol should learn for his guidance.’ 

‘Maybe,’ said Galadriel; ‘but not of me.’ 

And Melian spoke then no more of these matters with Galadriel; but she told 
to King Thingol all that she had heard of the Silmarils. ‘This is a great matter,’ 
she said, ‘greater indeed than the Noldor themselves understand; for the Light of 
Aman and the fate of Arda lie locked now in these things, the work of Feanor, 
who is gone. They shall not be recovered, I foretell, by any power of the Eldar; 
and the world shall be broken in battles that are to come, ere they are wrested 
from Morgoth. See now! Feanor they have slain, and many another, as I guess; 
but first of all the deaths they have brought and yet shall bring was Finwe your 
friend. Morgoth slew him, ere he fled from Aman.’ 

Then Thingol was silent, being filled with grief and foreboding; but at length 
he said: ‘Now at last I understand the coming of the Noldor out of the West, at 
which I wondered much before. Not to our aid did they come (save by chance); 
for those that remain in Middle-earth the Valar will leave to their own devices, 
until the uttermost need. For vengeance and redress of their loss the Noldor 
came. Yet all the more sure shall they be as allies against Morgoth, with whom it 
is not now to be thought that they shall ever make treaty.’ 

But Melian said: ‘Truly for these causes they came; but for others also. 
Beware of the sons of Feanor! The shadow of the wrath of the Valar lies upon 
them; and they have done evil, I perceive, both in Aman and to their own kin. A 
grief but lulled to sleep lies between the princes of the Noldor.’ 



And Thingol answered: ‘What is that to me? Of Feanor I have heard but 
report, which makes him great indeed. Of his sons I hear little to my pleasure; 
yet they are likely to prove the deadliest foes of our foe? 

‘Their swords and their counsels shall have two edges/ said Melian; and 
afterwards they spoke no more of this matter. 


It was not long before whispered tales began to pass among the Sindar 
concerning the deeds of the Noldor ere they came to Beleriand. Certain it is 
whence they came, and the evil truth was enhanced and poisoned by lies; but the 
Sindar were yet unwary and trustful of words, and (as may well be thought) 
Morgoth chose them for this first assault of his malice, for they knew him not. 
And Cirdan, hearing these dark tales, was troubled; for he was wise, and 
perceived swiftly that true or false they were put about at this time through 
malice, though the malice he deemed was that of the princes of the Noldor, 
because of the jealousy of their houses. Therefore he sent messengers to Thingol 
to tell all that he had heard. 

It chanced that at that time the sons of Finarfin were again the guests of 
Thingol, for they wished to see their sister Galadriel. Then Thingol, being 
greatly moved, spoke in anger to Finrod, saying: ‘Ill have you done to me, 
kinsman, to conceal so great matters from me. For now I have learned of all the 
evil deeds of the Noldor/ 

But Finrod answered: ‘What ill have I done you, lord? Or what evil deed have 
the Noldor done in all your realm to grieve you? Neither against your kingship 
nor against any of your people have they thought evil or done evil/ 




‘I marvel at you, son of Earwen,’ said Thingol, ‘that you would come to the 
board of your kinsman thus red-handed from the slaying of your mother’s kin, 
and yet say naught in defence, nor yet seek any pardon!’ 

Then Finrod was greatly troubled, but he was silent, for he could not defend 
himself, save by bringing charges against the other princes of the Noldor; and 
that he was loath to do before Thingol. But in Angrod’s heart the memory of the 
words of Caranthir welled up again in bitterness, and he cried: ‘Lord, I know not 
what lies you have heard, nor whence; but we came not red-handed. Guiltless we 
came forth, save maybe of folly, to listen to the words of fell Feanor, and become 
as if besotted with wine, and as briefly. No evil did we do on our road, but 
suffered ourselves great wrong; and forgave it. For this we are named tale¬ 
bearers to you and treasonable to the Noldor: untruly as you know, for we have 
of our loyalty been silent before you, and thus earned your anger. But now these 
charges are no longer to be borne, and the truth you shall know.’ 

Then Angrod spoke bitterly against the sons of Feanor, telling of the blood at 
Alqualonde, and the Doom of Mandos, and the burning of the ships at Losgar. 
And he cried: ‘Where-fore should we that endured the Grinding Ice bear the 
name of kinslayers and traitors?’ 

‘Yet the shadow of Mandos lies on you also,’ said Melian. But Thingol was 



long silent ere he spoke. ‘Go now!’ he said. ‘For my heart is hot within me. Later 
you may return, if you will; for I will not shut my doors for ever against you, my 
kindred, that were ensnared in an evil that you did not aid. With Fingolfin and 
his people also I will keep friendship, for they have bitterly atoned for such ill as 
they did. And in our hatred of the Power that wrought all this woe our griefs 
shall be lost. But hear my words! Never again in my ears shall be heard the 
tongue of those who slew my kin in Alqualonde! Nor in all my realm shall it be 
openly spoken, while my power endures. All the Sindar shall hear my command 
that they shall neither speak with the tongue of the Noldor nor answer to it. And 
all such as use it shall be held slayers of kin and betrayers of kin unrepentant.’ 

Then the sons of Finarfin departed from Menegroth with heavy hearts, 
perceiving how the words of Mandos would ever be made true, and that none of 
the Noldor that followed after Feanor could escape from the shadow that lay 
upon his house. And it came to pass even as Thingol had spoken; for the Sindar 
heard his word, and thereafter throughout Beleriand they refused the tongue of 
the Noldor, and shunned those that spoke it aloud; but the Exiles took the 
Sindarin tongue in all their daily uses, and the High Speech of the West was 
spoken only by the lords of the Noldor among themselves. Yet that speech lived 
ever as a language of lore, wherever any of that people dwelt. 

It came to pass that Nargothrond was full-wrought (and yet Turgon still dwelt 
in the halls of Vinyamar), and the sons of Finarfin were gathered there to a feast; 
and Galadriel came from Doriath and dwelt a while in Nargothrond. Now King 
Finrod Felagund had no wife, and Galadriel asked him why this should be; but 
foresight came upon Felagund as she spoke, and he said: ‘An oath I too shall 
swear, and must be free to fulfil it, and go into darkness. Nor shall anything of 
my realm endure that a son should inherit.’ 

But it is said that not until that hour had such cold thoughts ruled him; for 
indeed she whom he had loved was Amarie of the Vanyar, and she went not with 
him into exile. 



CHAPTER 16 



OF MAEGLIN 


Aredhel Ar-Feiniel, the White Lady of the Noldor, daughter of Fingolfin, dwelt 
in Nevrast with Turgon her brother, and she went with him to the Hidden 
Kingdom. But she wearied of the guarded city of Gondolin, desiring ever the 
longer the more to ride again in the wide lands and to walk in the forests, as had 
been her wont in Valinor; and when two hundred years had passed since 
Gondolin was full-wrought, she spoke to Turgon and asked leave to depart. 
Turgon was loath to grant this, and long denied her; but at the last he yielded, 
saying: ‘Go then, if you will, though it is against my wisdom, and I forebode that 
ill will come of it both to you and to me. But you shall go only to seek Fingon, 
our brother; and those that I send with you shall return hither to Gondolin as 
swiftly as they may.’ 

But Aredhel said: ‘I am your sister and not your servant, and beyond your 
bounds I will go as seems good to me. And if you begrudge me an escort, then I 
will go alone.’ 

Then Turgon answered: ‘I grudge you nothing that I have. Yet I desire that 
none shall dwell beyond my walls who know the way hither; and if I trust you, 
my sister, others I trust less to keep guard on their tongues.’ 

And Turgon appointed three lords of his household to ride with Aredhel, and 
he bade them lead her to Fingon in Hithlum, if they might prevail upon her. ‘And 
be wary,’ he said; ‘for though Morgoth be yet hemmed in the North there are 
many perils in Middle-earth of which the Lady knows nothing.’ Then Aredhel 
departed from Gondolin, and Turgon’s heart was heavy at her going. 

But when she came to the Ford of Brithiach in the River Sirion she said to her 
companions: ‘Turn now south and not north, for I will not ride to Hithlum; my 
heart desires rather to find the sons of Feanor, my friends of old.’ And since she 
could not be dissuaded they turned south as she commanded, and sought 
admittance into Doriath. But the march-wardens denied them; for Thingol would 
suffer none of the Noldor to pass the Girdle, save his kinsfolk of the house of 
Finarfin, and least of all those that were friends of the sons of Feanor. Therefore 
the march-wardens said to Aredhel: ‘To the land of Celegorm for which you 
seek, Lady, you may by no means pass through the realm of King Thingol; you 
must ride beyond the Girdle of Melian, to the south or to the north. The speediest 
way is by the paths that lead east from the Brithiach through Dimbar and along 
the north-march of this kingdom, until you pass the Bridge of Esgalduin and the 
Fords of Aros, and come to the lands that lie behind the Hill of Himring. There 
dwell, as we believe, Celegorm and Curufin, and it may be that you will find 



them; but the road is perilous.’ 

Then Aredhel turned back and sought the dangerous road between the haunted 
valleys of Ered Gorgoroth and the north fences of Doriath; and as they drew near 
to the evil region of Nan Dungortheb the riders became enmeshed in shadows, 
and Aredhel strayed from her companions and was lost. They sought long for her 
in vain, fearing that she had been ensnared, or had drunk from the poisoned 
streams of that land; but the fell creatures of Ungoliant that dwelt in the ravines 
were aroused and pursued them, and they hardly escaped with their lives. When 
at last they returned and their tale was told there was great sorrow in Gondolin; 
and Turgon sat long alone, enduring grief and anger in silence. 

But Aredhel, having sought in vain for her companions, rode on, for she was 
fearless and hardy of heart, as were all the children of Finwe; and she held on 
her way, and crossing Esgalduin and Aros came to the land of Himlad between 
Aros and Celon where Celegorm and Curufin dwelt in those days, before the 
breaking of the Siege of Angband. At that time they were from home, riding 
with Caranthir east in Thargelion; but the people of Celegorm welcomed her and 
bade her stay among them with honour until their lord’s return. There for a while 
she was content, and had great joy in wandering free in the woodlands; but as the 
year lengthened and Celegorm did not return, she became restless again, and 
took to riding alone ever further abroad, seeking for new paths and untrodden 
glades. Thus it chanced in the waning of the year that Aredhel came to the south 
of Himlad, and passed over Celon; and before she was aware she was enmeshed 
in Nan Elmoth. 

In that wood in ages past Melian walked in the twilight of Middle-earth when 
the trees were young, and enchantment lay upon it still. But now the trees of Nan 
Elmoth were the tallest and darkest in all Beleriand, and there the sun never 
came; and there Eol dwelt, who was named the Dark Elf. Of old he was of the 
kin of Thingol, but he was restless and ill at ease in Doriath, and when the Girdle 
of Melian was set about the Forest of Region where he dwelt he fled thence to 
Nan Elmoth. There he lived in deep shadow, loving the night and the twilight 
under the stars. He shunned the Noldor, holding them to blame for the return of 
Morgoth, to trouble the quiet of Beleriand; but for the Dwarves he had more 
liking than any other of the Elvenfolk of old. From him the Dwarves learned 
much of what passed in the lands of the Eldar. 

Now the traffic of the Dwarves down from the Blue Mountains followed two 
roads across East Beleriand, and the northern way, going towards the Fords of 
Aros, passed nigh to Nan Elmoth; and there Eol would meet the Naugrim and 
hold converse with them. And as their friendship grew he would at times go and 
dwell as guest in the deep mansions of Nogrod or Belegost. There he learned 



much of metalwork, and came to great skill therein; and he devised a metal as 
hard as the steel of the Dwarves, but so malleable that he could make it thin and 
supple; and yet it remained resistant to all blades and darts. He named it galvorn, 
for it was black and shining like jet, and he was clad in it whenever he went 
abroad. But Eol, though stooped by his smithwork, was no Dwarf, but a tall Elf 
of a high kin of the Teleri, noble though grim of face; and his eyes could see 
deep into shadows and dark places. And it came to pass that he saw Aredhel Ar- 
Feiniel as she strayed among the tall trees near the borders of Nan Elmoth, a 
gleam of white in the dim land. Very fair she seemed to him, and he desired her; 
and he set his enchantments about her so that she could not find the ways out, 
but drew ever nearer to his dwelling in the depths of the wood. There were his 
smithy, and his dim halls, and such servants as he had, silent and secret as their 
master. And when Aredhel, weary with wandering, came at last to his doors, he 
revealed himself; and he welcomed her, and led her into his house. And there she 
remained; for Eol took her to wife, and it was long ere any of her kin heard of 
her again. 









It is not said that Aredhel was wholly unwilling, nor that her life in Nan 
Elmoth was hateful to her for many years. For though at Eol’s command she 
must shun the sunlight, they wandered far together under the stars or by the light 
of the sickle moon; or she might fare alone as she would, save that Eol forbade 
her to seek the sons of Feanor, or any others of the Noldor. And Aredhel bore to 
Eol a son in the shadows of Nan Elmoth, and in her heart she gave him a name 
in the forbidden tongue of the Noldor, Lomion, that signifies Child of the 
Twilight; but his father gave him no name until he was twelve years old. Then he 
called him Maeglin, which is Sharp Glance, for he perceived that the eyes of his 
son were more piercing than his own, and his thought could read the secrets of 
hearts beyond the mist of words. 

As Maeglin grew to full stature he resembled in face and form rather his 
kindred of the Noldor, but in mood and mind he was the son of his father. His 
words were few save in matters that touched him near, and then his voice had a 
power to move those that heard him and to overthrow those that withstood him. 
He was tall and black-haired; his eyes were dark, yet bright and keen as the eyes 
of the Noldor, and his skin was white. Often he went with Eol to the cities of the 
Dwarves in the east of Ered Lindon, and there he learned eagerly what they 
would teach, and above all the craft of finding the ores of metals in the 
mountains. 

Yet it is said that Maeglin loved his mother better, and if Eol were abroad he 
would sit long beside her and listen to all that she could tell him of her kin and 
their deeds in Eldamar, and of the might and valour of the princes of the House 
of Fingolfin. All these things he laid to heart, but most of all that which he heard 
of Turgon, and that he had no heir; for Elenwe his wife perished in the crossing 
of the Helcaraxe, and his daughter Idril Celebrindal was his only child. 

In the telling of these tales there was awakened in Aredhel a desire to see her 
own kin again, and she marvelled that she had grown weary of the light of 
Gondolin, and the fountains in the sun, and the green sward of Tumladen under 
the windy skies of spring; moreover she was often alone in the shadows when 
both her son and her husband were away. Of these tales also grew the first 
quarrels of Maeglin and Eol. For by no means would his mother reveal to 
Maeglin where Turgon dwelt, nor by what means one might come thither, and he 
bided his time, trusting yet to wheedle the secret from her, or perhaps to read her 
unguarded mind; but ere that could be done he desired to look on the Noldor and 
speak with the sons of Feanor, his kin, that dwelt not far away. But when he 



declared his purpose to Eol, his father was wrathful. ‘You are of the house of 
Eol, Maeglin, my son/ he said, ‘and not of the Golodhrim. All this land is the 
land of the Teleri, and I will not deal nor have my son deal with the slayers of 
our kin, the invaders and usurpers of our homes. In this you shall obey me, or I 
will set you in bonds/ And Maeglin did not answer, but was cold and silent, and 
went abroad no more with Eol; and Eol mistrusted him. 

It came to pass that at the midsummer the Dwarves, as was their custom, bade 
Eol to a feast in Nogrod; and he rode away. Now Maeglin and his mother were 
free for a while to go where they wished, and they rode often to the eaves of the 
wood, seeking the sunlight; and desire grew hot in Maeglin’s heart to leave Nan 
Elmoth for ever. Therefore he said to Aredhel: ‘Lady, let us depart while there is 
time! What hope is there in this wood for you or for me? Here we are held in 
bondage, and no profit shall I find here; for I have learned all that my father has 
to teach, or that the Naugrim will reveal to me. Shall we not seek for Gondolin? 
You shall be my guide, and I will be your guard!’ 

Then Aredhel was glad, and looked with pride upon her son; and telling the 
servants of Eol that they went to seek the sons of Feanor they departed and rode 
away to the north eaves of Nan Elmoth. There they crossed the slender stream of 
Celon into the land of Himlad and rode on to the Fords of Aros, and so westward 
along the fences of Doriath. 

Now Eol returned out of the east sooner than Maeglin had foreseen, and found 
his wife and his son but two days gone; and so great was his anger that he 
followed after them even by the light of day. As he entered the Himlad he 
mastered his wrath and went warily, remembering his danger, for Celegorm and 
Curufin were mighty lords who loved Eol not at all, and Curufin moreover was 
of perilous mood; but the scouts of Aglon had marked the riding of Maeglin and 
Aredhel to the Fords of Aros, and Curufin perceiving that strange deeds were 
afoot came south from the Pass and encamped near the Fords. And before Eol 
had ridden far across the Himlad he was waylaid by the riders of Curufin, and 
taken to their lord. 

Then Curufin said to Eol: ‘What errand have you, Dark Elf, in my lands? An 
urgent matter, perhaps, that keeps one so sun-shy abroad by day.’ 

And Eol knowing his peril restrained the bitter words that arose in his mind. ‘I 
have learned, Lord Curufin,’ he said, ‘that my son and my wife, the White Lady 
of Gondolin, have ridden to visit you while I was from home; and it seemed to 
me fitting that I should join them on this errand.’ 

Then Curufin laughed at Eol, and he said: ‘They might have found their 
welcome here less warm than they hoped, had you accompanied them; but it is 
no matter, for that was not their errand. It is not two days since they passed over 



the Arossiach, and thence rode swiftly westward. It seems that you would 
deceive me; unless indeed you yourself have been deceived.’ 

And Eol answered: Then, lord, perhaps you will give me leave to go, and 
discover the truth of this matter.’ 

‘You have my leave, but not my love,’ said Curufin. ‘The sooner you depart 
from my land the better will it please me.’ 

Then Eol mounted his horse, saying: ‘It is good, Lord Curufin, to find a 
kinsman thus kindly at need. I will remember it when I return.’ Then Curufin 
looked darkly upon Eol. ‘Do not flaunt the title of your wife before me,’ he said. 
‘For those who steal the daughters of the Noldor and wed them without gift or 
leave do not gain kinship with their kin. I have given you leave to go. Take it, 
and be gone. By the laws of the Eldar I may not slay you at this time. And this 
counsel I add: return now to your dwelling in the darkness of Nan Elmoth; for 
my heart warns me that if you now pursue those who love you no more, never 
will you return thither.’ 

Then Eol rode off in haste, and he was filled with hatred of all the Noldor; for 
he perceived now that Maeglin and Aredhel were fleeing to Gondolin. And 
driven by anger and the shame of his humiliation he crossed the Fords of Aros 
and rode hard upon the way that they had gone before; but though they knew not 
that he followed them, and he had the swiftest steed, he came never in sight of 
them until they reached the Brithiach, and abandoned their horses. Then by ill 
fate they were betrayed; for the horses neighed loudly, and Eol’s steed heard 
them, and sped towards them; and Eol saw from afar the white raiment of 
Aredhel, and marked which way she went, seeking the secret path into the 
mountains. 

Now Aredhel and Maeglin came to the Outer Gate of Gondolin and the Dark 
Guard under the mountains; and there she was received with joy, and passing 
through the Seven Gates she came with Maeglin to Turgon upon Amon Gwareth. 
Then the King listened with wonder to all that Aredhel had to tell; and he looked 
with liking upon Maeglin his sister-son, seeing in him one worthy to be 
accounted among the princes of the Noldor. 

‘I rejoice indeed that Ar-Feiniel has returned to Gondolin,’ he said, ‘and now 
more fair again shall my city seem than in the days when I deemed her lost. And 
Maeglin shall have the highest honour in my realm.’ 

Then Maeglin bowed low and took Turgon for lord and king, to do all his will; 
but thereafter he stood silent and watchful, for the bliss and splendour of 
Gondolin surpassed all that he had imagined from the tales of his mother, and he 
was amazed by the strength of the city and the hosts of its people, and the many 
things strange and beautiful that he beheld. Yet to none were his eyes more often 



drawn than to Idril the King’s daughter, who sat beside him; for she was golden 
as the Vanyar, her mother’s kindred, and she seemed to him as the sun from 
which all the King’s hall drew its light. 

But Eol, following after Aredhel, found the Dry River and the secret path, and 
so creeping in by stealth he came to the Guard, and was taken and questioned. 
And when the Guard heard that he claimed Aredhel as wife they were amazed, 
and sent a swift messenger to the City; and he came to the King’s hall. 

'Lord,’ he cried, ‘the Guard have taken captive one that came by stealth to the 
Dark Gate. Eol he names himself, and he is a tall Elf, dark and grim, of the 
kindred of the Sindar; yet he claims the Lady Aredhel as his wife, and demands 
to be brought before you. His wrath is great and he is hard to restrain; but we 
have not slain him as your law commands.’ 

Then Aredhel said: ‘Alas! Eol has followed us, even as I feared. But with 
great stealth was it done; for we saw and heard no pursuit as we entered upon the 
Hidden Way.’ Then she said to the messenger: ‘He speaks but the truth. He is 
Eol, and I am his wife, and he is the father of my son. Slay him not, but lead him 
hither to the King’s judgement, if the King so wills.’ 

And so it was done; and Eol was brought to Turgon’s hall and stood before his 
high seat, proud and sullen. Though he was amazed no less than his son at all 
that he saw, his heart was filled the more with anger and with hate of the Noldor. 
But Turgon treated him with honour, and rose up and would take his hand; and 
he said: ‘Welcome, kinsman, for so I hold you. Here you shall dwell at your 
pleasure, save only that you must here abide and depart not from my kingdom; 
for it is my law that none who finds the way hither shall depart.’ 

But Eol withdrew his hand. ‘I acknowledge not your law,’ he said. ‘No right 
have you or any of your kin in this land to seize realms or to set bounds, either 
here or there. This is the land of the Teleri, to which you bring war and all 
unquiet, dealing ever proudly and unjustly. I care nothing for your secrets and I 
came not to spy upon you, but to claim my own: my wife and my son. Yet if in 
Aredhel your sister you have some claim, then let her remain; let the bird go 
back to the cage, where soon she will sicken again, as she sickened before. But 
not so Maeglin. My son you shall not withhold from me. Come, Maeglin son of 
Eol! Your father commands you. Leave the house of his enemies and the slayers 
of his kin, or be accursed!’ But Maeglin answered nothing. 

Then Turgon sat in his high seat holding his staff of doom, and in a stern voice 
spoke: ‘I will not debate with you, Dark Elf. By the swords of the Noldor alone 
are your sunless woods defended. Your freedom to wander there wild you owe to 
my kin; and but for them long since you would have laboured in thraldom in the 
pits of Angband. And here I am King; and whether you will it or will it not, my 



doom is law. This choice only is given to you: to abide here, or to die here; and 
so also for your son.’ 

Then Eol looked into the eyes of King Turgon, and he was not daunted, but 
stood long without word or movement while a still silence fell upon the hall; and 
Aredhel was afraid, knowing that he was perilous. Suddenly, swift as serpent, he 
seized a javelin that he held hid beneath his cloak and cast it at Maeglin, crying: 
The second choice I take and for my son also! You shall not hold what is mine!’ 

But Aredhel sprang before the dart, and it smote her in the shoulder; and Eol 
was overborne by many and set in bonds, and led away, while others tended 
Aredhel. But Maeglin looking upon his father was silent. 

It was appointed that Eol should be brought on the next day to the King’s 
judgement; and Aredhel and Idril moved Turgon to mercy. But in the evening 
Aredhel sickened, though the wound had seemed little, and she fell into the 
darkness, and in the night she died; for the point of the javelin was poisoned, 
though none knew it until too late. 

Therefore when Eol was brought before Turgon he found no mercy; and they 
led him forth to the Caragdur, a precipice of black rock upon the north side of 
the hill of Gondolin, there to cast him down from the sheer walls of the city. And 
Maeglin stood by and said nothing; but at the last Eol cried out: ‘So you forsake 
your father and his kin, ill-gotten son! Here shall you fail of all your hopes, and 
here may you yet die the same death as I.’ 

Then they cast Eol over the Caragdur, and so he ended, and to all in Gondolin 
it seemed just; but Idril was troubled, and from that day she mistrusted her 
kinsman. But Maeglin prospered and grew great among the Gondolindrim, 
praised by all, and high in the favour of Turgon; for if he would learn eagerly 
and swiftly all that he might, he had much also to teach. And he gathered about 
him all such as had the most bent to smithcraft and mining; and he sought in the 
Echoriath (which are the Encircling Mountains), and found rich lodes of ore of 
divers metals. Most he prized the hard iron of the mine of Anghabar in the north 
of the Echoriath, and thence he got a wealth of forged metal and of steel, so that 
the arms of the Gondolindrim were made ever stronger and more keen; and that 
stood them in good stead in the days to come. Wise in counsel was Maeglin and 
wary, and yet hardy and valiant at need. And that was seen in after days: for 
when in the dread year of the Nirnaeth Arnoediad Turgon opened his leaguer and 
marched forth to the help of Fingon in the north, Maeglin would not remain in 
Gondolin as regent of the King, but went to the war and fought beside Turgon, 
and proved fell and fearless in battle. 

Thus all seemed well with the fortunes of Maeglin, who had risen to be 
mighty among the princes of the Noldor, and greatest save one in the most 



renowned of their realms. Yet he did not reveal his heart; and though not all 
things went as he would he endured it in silence, hiding his mind so that few 
could read it, unless it were Idril Celebrindal. For from his first days in Gondolin 
he had borne a grief, ever worsening, that robbed him of all joy: he loved the 
beauty of Idril and desired her, without hope. The Eldar wedded not with kin so 
near, nor ever before had any desired to do so. And however that might be, Idril 
loved Maeglin not at all; and knowing his thought of her she loved him the less. 
For it seemed to her a thing strange and crooked in him, as indeed the Eldar ever 
since have deemed it: an evil fruit of the Kinslaying, whereby the shadow of the 
curse of Mandos fell upon the last hope of the Noldor. But as the years passed 
still Maeglin watched Idril, and waited, and his love turned to darkness in his 
heart. And he sought the more to have his will in other matters, shirking no toil 
or burden, if he might thereby have power. 

Thus it was in Gondolin; and amid all the bliss of that realm, while its glory 
lasted, a dark seed of evil was sown. 



mn 



























CHAPTER 17 



OF THE COMING OF MEN INTO THE WEST 


When three hundred years and more were gone since the Noldor came to 
Beleriand, in the days of the Long Peace, Finrod Felagund lord of Nargothrond 
journeyed east of Sirion and went hunting with Maglor and Maedhros, sons of 
Feanor. But he wearied of the chase and passed on alone towards the mountains 
of Ered Lindon that he saw shining afar; and taking the Dwarf-road he crossed 
Gelion at the ford of Sarn Athrad, and turning south over the upper streams of 
Ascar, he came into the north of Ossiriand. 

In a valley among the foothills of the mountains, below the springs of Thalos, 
he saw lights in the evening, and far off he heard the sound of song. At this he 
wondered much, for the Green-elves of that land lit no fires, nor did they sing by 
night. At first he feared that a raid of Ores had passed the leaguer of the North, 
but as he drew near he perceived that it was not so; for the singers used a tongue 
that he had not heard before, neither that of Dwarves nor of Ores. Then 
Felagund, standing silent in the night-shadow of the trees, looked down into the 
camp, and there he beheld a strange people. 

Now these were a part of the kindred and following of Beor the Old, as he was 
afterwards called, a chieftain among Men. After many lives of wandering out of 
the East he had led them at last over the Blue Mountains, the first of the race of 
Men to enter Beleriand; and they sang because they were glad, and believed that 
they had escaped from all perils and had come at last to a land without fear. 

Long Felagund watched them, and love for them stirred in his heart; but he 
remained hidden in the trees until they had all fallen asleep. Then he went 
among the sleeping people, and sat beside their dying fire where none kept 
watch; and he took up a rude harp which Beor had laid aside, and he played 
music upon it such as the ears of Men had not heard; for they had as yet no 
teachers in the art, save only the Dark Elves in the wild lands. 

Now men awoke and listened to Felagund as he harped and sang, and each 
thought that he was in some fair dream, until he saw that his fellows were awake 
also beside him; but they did not speak or stir while Felagund still played, 
because of the beauty of the music and the wonder of the song. Wisdom was in 
the words of the Elven-king, and the hearts grew wiser that hearkened to him; 
for the things of which he sang, of the making of Arda, and the bliss of Aman 
beyond the shadows of the Sea, came as clear visions before their eyes, and his 
Elvish speech was interpreted in each mind according to its measure. 

Thus it was that Men called King Felagund, whom they first met of all the 
Eldar, Nona, that is Wisdom, in the language of that people, and after him they 



named his folk Nomin, the Wise. Indeed they believed at first that Felagund was 
one of the Valar, of whom they had heard rumour that they dwelt far in the West; 
and this was (some say) the cause of their journeying. But Felagund dwelt 
among them and taught them true knowledge, and they loved him, and took him 
for their lord, and were ever after loyal to the house of Finarfin. 

Now the Eldar were beyond all other peoples skilled in tongues; and Felagund 
discovered also that he could read in the minds of Men such thoughts as they 
wished to reveal in speech, so that their words were easily interpreted. It is said 
also that these Men had long had dealings with the Dark Elves east of the 
mountains, and from them had learned much of their speech; and since all the 
languages of the Quendi were of one origin, the language of Beor and his folk 
resembled the Elven-tongue in many words and devices. It was not long 
therefore before Felagund could hold converse with Beor; and while he dwelt 
with him they spoke much together. But when he questioned him concerning the 
arising of Men and their journeys, Beor would say little; and indeed he knew 
little, for the fathers of his people had told few tales of their past and a silence 
had fallen upon their memory. ‘A darkness lies behind us,’ Beor said; ‘and we 
have turned our backs upon it, and we do not desire to return thither even in 
thought. Westwards our hearts have been turned, and we believe that there we 
shall find Light.’ 

But it was said afterwards among the Eldar that when Men awoke in Hildorien 
at the rising of the Sun the spies of Morgoth were watchful, and tidings were 
soon brought to him; and this seemed to him so great a matter that secretly under 
shadow he himself departed from Angband, and went forth into Middle-earth, 
leaving to Sauron the command of the War. Of his dealings with Men the Eldar 
indeed knew nothing, at that time, and learnt but little afterwards; but that a 
darkness lay upon the hearts of Men (as the shadow of the Kinslaying and the 
Doom of Mandos lay upon the Noldor) they perceived clearly even in the people 
of the Elf-friends whom they first knew. To corrupt or destroy whatsoever arose 
new and fair was ever the chief desire of Morgoth; and doubtless he had this 
purpose also in his errand: by fear and lies to make Men the foes of the Eldar, 
and bring them up out of the east against Beleriand. But this design was slow to 
ripen, and was never wholly achieved; for Men (it is said) were at first very few 
in number, whereas Morgoth grew afraid of the growing power and union of the 
Eldar and came back to Angband, leaving behind at that time but few servants, 
and those of less might and cunning. 


Now Felagund learned from Beor that there were many other Men of like 



mind who were also journeying westward. ‘Others of my own kin have crossed 
the Mountains/ he said, ‘and they are wandering not far away; and the Haladin, 
a people from whom we are sundered in speech, are still in the valleys on the 
eastern slopes, awaiting tidings before they venture further. There are yet other 
Men, whose tongue is more like to ours, with whom we have had dealings at 
times. They were before us on the westward march, but we passed them; for they 
are a numerous people, and yet keep together and move slowly, being all ruled 
by one chieftain whom they call Marach/ 

Now the Green-elves of Ossiriand were troubled by the coming of Men, and 
when they heard that a lord of the Eldar from over the Sea was among them they 
sent messengers to Felagund. ‘Lord/ they said, ‘if you have power over these 
newcomers, bid them return by the ways that they came, or else to go forward. 
For we desire no strangers in this land to break the peace in which we live. And 
these folk are hewers of trees and hunters of beasts; therefore we are their 
unfriends, and if they will not depart we shall afflict them in all ways that we 
can/ 

Then by the advice of Felagund Beor gathered all the wandering families and 
kindreds of his people, and they removed over Gelion, and took up their abode in 
the lands of Amrod and Amras, upon the east banks of the Celon south of Nan 
Elmoth, near to the borders of Doriath; and the name of that land thereafter was 
Estolad, the Encampment. But when after a year had passed Felagund wished to 
return to his own country, Beor begged leave to come with him; and he remained 
in the service of the King of Nargothrond while his life lasted. In this way he got 
his name, Beor, whereas his name before had been Balan; for Beor signified 
‘Vassal’ in the tongue of his people. The rule of his folk he committed to Baran 
his elder son; and he did not return again to Estolad. 


Soon after the departure of Felagund the other Men of whom Beor had spoken 
came also into Beleriand. First came the Haladin; but meeting the unfriendship 
of the Green-elves they turned north and dwelt in Thargelion, in the country of 
Caranthir son of Feanor: there for a time they had peace, and the people of 
Caranthir paid little heed to them. In the next year Marach led his people over 
the mountains; they were a tall and warlike folk, marching in ordered companies, 
and the Elves of Ossiriand hid themselves and did not waylay them. But Marach, 
hearing that the people of Beor were dwelling in a green and fertile land, came 
down the Dwarf-road, and settled in the country south and east of the dwellings 
of Baran son of Beor; and there was great friendship between those peoples. 

Felagund himself often returned to visit Men; and many other Elves out of the 



west-lands, both Noldor and Sindar, journeyed to Estolad, being eager to see the 
Edain, whose coming had long been foretold. Now Atani, the Second People, 
was the name given to Men in Valinor in the lore that told of their coming; but in 
the speech of Beleriand that name became Edain, and it was there used only of 
the three kindreds of the Elf-friends. 

Fingolfin, as King of all the Noldor, sent messengers of welcome to them; and 
then many young and eager men of the Edain went away and took service with 
the kings and lords of the Eldar. Among them was Malach son of Marach, and he 
dwelt in Hithlum for fourteen years; and he learned the Elven-tongue and was 
given the name of Aradan. 

The Edain did not long dwell content in Estolad, for many still desired to go 
westward; but they did not know the way. Before them lay the fences of Doriath, 
and southward lay Sirion and its impassable fens. Therefore the kings of the 
three houses of the Noldor, seeing hope of strength in the sons of Men, sent word 
that any of the Edain that wished might remove and come to dwell among their 
people. In this way the migration of the Edain began: at first little by little, but 
later in families and kindreds, they arose and left Estolad, until after some fifty 
years many thousands had entered the lands of the Kings. Most of these took the 
long road northwards, until the ways became well known to them. The people of 
Beor came to Dorthonion and dwelt in lands ruled by the house of Finarfin. The 
people of Aradan (for Marach his father remained in Estolad until his death) for 
the most part went on westward; and some came to Hithlum, but Magor son of 
Aradan and many of the people passed down Sirion into Beleriand and dwelt a 
while in the vales of the southern slopes of Ered Wethrin. 

It is said that in all these matters none save Finrod Felagund took counsel with 
King Thingol, and he was ill pleased, both for that reason, and because he was 
troubled by dreams concerning the coming of Men, ere ever the first tidings of 
them were heard. Therefore he commanded that Men should take no lands to 
dwell in save in the north, and that the princes whom they served should be 
answerable for all that they did; and he said: Tnto Doriath shall no Man come 
while my realm lasts, not even those of the house of Beor who serve Finrod the 
beloved.’ Melian said nothing to him at that time, but afterwards she said to 
Galadriel: 'Now the world runs on swiftly to great tidings. And one of Men, 
even of Beor’s house, shall indeed come, and the Girdle of Melian shall not 
restrain him, for doom greater than my power shall send him; and the songs that 
shall spring from that coming shall endure when all Middle-earth is changed.’ 


But many Men remained in Estolad, and there was still a mingled people 



living there long years after, until in the min of Beleriand they were 
overwhelmed or fled back into the East. For beside the old who deemed that 
their wandering days were over there were not a few who desired to go their own 
ways, and they feared the Eldar and the light of their eyes; and then dissensions 
awoke among the Edain, in which the shadow of Morgoth may be discerned, for 
certain it is that he knew of the coming of Men into Beleriand and of their 
growing friendship with the Elves. 

The leaders of discontent were Bereg of the house of Beor, and Amlach, one 
of the grandsons of Marach; and they said openly: ‘We took long roads, desiring 
to escape the perils of Middle-earth and the dark things that dwell there; for we 
heard that there was Light in the West. But now we learn that the Light is beyond 
the Sea. Thither we cannot come where the Gods dwell in bliss. Save one; for 
the Lord of the Dark is here before us, and the Eldar, wise but fell, who make 
endless war upon him. In the North he dwells, they say; and there is the pain and 
death from which we fled. We will not go that way.’ 

Then a council and assembly of Men was called, and great numbers came 
together. And the Elf-friends answered Bereg, saying: ‘Truly from the Dark King 
come all the evils from which we fled; but he seeks dominion over all Middle- 
earth, and whither now shall we turn and he will not pursue us? Unless he be 
vanquished here, or at least held in leaguer. Only by the valour of the Eldar is he 
restrained, and maybe it was for this purpose, to aid them at need, that we were 
brought into this land.’ 

To this Bereg answered: ‘Let the Eldar look to it! Our lives are short enough.’ 
But there arose one who seemed to all to be Amlach son of Imlach, speaking fell 
words that shook the hearts of all who heard him: ‘All this is but Elvish lore, 
tales to beguile newcomers that are unwary. The Sea has no shore. There is no 
Light in the West. You have followed a fool-fire of the Elves to the end of the 
world! Which of you has seen the least of the Gods? Who has beheld the Dark 
King in the North? Those who seek the dominion of Middle-earth are the Eldar. 
Greedy for wealth they have delved in the earth for its secrets and have stirred to 
wrath the things that dwell beneath it, as they have ever done and ever shall. Let 
the Ores have the realm that is theirs, and we will have ours. There is room in 
the world, if the Eldar will let us be! ’ 

Then those that listened sat for a while astounded, and a shadow of fear fell on 
their hearts; and they resolved to depart far from the lands of the Eldar. But 
afterwards Amlach returned among them, and denied that he had been present at 
their debate or had spoken such words as they reported; and there was doubt and 
bewilderment among Men. Then the Elf-friends said: ‘You will now believe this 
at least: there is indeed a Dark Lord, and his spies and emissaries are among us; 



for he fears us, and the strength that we may give to his foes.’ 

But some still answered: ‘He hates us, rather, and ever the more the longer we 
dwell here, meddling in his quarrel with the Kings of the Eldar, to no gain of 
ours.’ Many therefore of those that yet remained in Estolad made ready to 
depart; and Bereg led a thousand of the people of Beor away southwards, and 
they passed out of the songs of those days. But Amlach repented, saying: ‘I have 
now a quarrel of my own with this Master of Lies, which will last to my life’s 
end’; and he went away north and entered the service of Maedhros. But those of 
his people who were of like mind with Bereg chose a new leader, and they went 
back over the mountains into Eriador, and are forgotten. 


During this time the Haladin remained in Thargelion and were content. But 
Morgoth, seeing that by lies and deceits he could not yet wholly estrange Elves 
and Men, was filled with wrath, and endeavoured to do Men what hurt he could. 
Therefore he sent out an Ore-raid, and passing east it escaped the leaguer, and 
came in stealth back over Ered Lindon by the passes of the Dwarf-road, and fell 
upon the Haladin in the southern woods of the land of Caranthir. 

Now the Haladin did not live under the rule of lords or many together, but 
each homestead was set apart and governed its own affairs, and they were slow 
to unite. But there was among them a man named Haldad, who was masterful 
and fearless; and he gathered all the brave men that he could find, and retreated 
to the angle of land between Ascar and Gelion, and in the utmost corner he built 
a stockade across from water to water; and behind it they led all the women and 
children that they could save. There they were besieged, until their food was 
gone. 

Haldad had twin children: Haleth his daughter, and Haidar his son; and both 
were valiant in the defence, for Haleth was a woman of great heart and strength. 
But at last Haldad was slain in a sortie against the Ores; and Haidar, who rushed 
out to save his father’s body from their butchery, was hewn down beside him. 
Then Haleth held the people together, though they were without hope; and some 
cast themselves in the rivers and were drowned. But seven days later, as the Ores 
made their last assault and had already broken through the stockade, there came 
suddenly a music of trumpets, and Caranthir with his host came down from the 
north and drove the Ores into the rivers. 

Then Caranthir looked kindly upon Men and did Haleth great honour; and he 
offered her recompense for her father and brother. And seeing, over late, what 
valour there was in the Edain, he said to her: ‘If you will remove and dwell 
further north, there you shall have the friendship and protection of the Eldar, and 



free lands of your own.’ 

But Haleth was proud, and unwilling to be guided or ruled, and most of the 
Haladin were of like mood. Therefore she thanked Caranthir, but answered: ‘My 
mind is now set, lord, to leave the shadow of the mountains, and go west, 
whither others of our kin have gone.’ When therefore the Haladin had gathered 
all whom they could find alive of their folk who had fled wild into the woods 
before the Ores, and had gleaned what remained of their goods in their burned 
homesteads, they took Haleth for their chief; and she led them at last to Estolad, 
and there dwelt for a time. 

But they remained a people apart, and were ever after known to Elves and 
Men as the People of Haleth. Haleth remained their chief while her days lasted, 
but she did not wed, and the headship afterwards passed to Haldan son of Haidar 
her brother. Soon however Haleth desired to move westward again; and though 
most of her people were against this counsel, she led them forth once more; and 
they went without help or guidance of the Eldar, and passing over Celon and 
Aros they journeyed in the perilous land between the Mountains of Terror and 
the Girdle of Melian. That land was even then not yet so evil as it after became, 
but it was no road for mortal Men to take without aid, and Haleth only brought 
her people through it with hardship and loss, constraining them to go forward by 
the strength of her will. At last they crossed over the Brithiach, and many bitterly 
repented of their journey; but there was now no returning. Therefore in new 
lands they went back to their old life as best they could; and they dwelt in free 
homesteads in the woods of Talath Dirnen beyond Teiglin, and some wandered 
far into the realm of Nargothrond. But there were many who loved the Lady 
Haleth and wished to go whither she would, and dwell under her rule; and these 
she led into the Forest of Brethil, between Teiglin and Sirion. Thither in the evil 
days that followed many of her scattered folk returned. 

Now Brethil was claimed as part of his realm by King Thingol, though it was 
not within the Girdle of Melian, and he would have denied it to Haleth; but 
Felagund, who had the friendship of Thingol, hearing of all that had befallen the 
People of Haleth, obtained this grace for her: that she should dwell free in 
Brethil, upon the condition only that her people should guard the Crossings of 
Teiglin against all enemies of the Eldar, and allow no Ores to enter their woods. 
To this Haleth answered: ‘Where are Haldad my father, and Haidar my brother? 
If the King of Doriath fears a friendship between Haleth and those who have 
devoured her kin, then the thoughts of the Eldar are strange to Men? And Haleth 
dwelt in Brethil until she died; and her people raised a green mound over her in 
the heights of the forest, Tur Haretha, the Lady-barrow, Haudh-en-Arwen in the 
Sindarin tongue. 



In this way it came to pass that the Edain dwelt in the lands of the Eldar, some 
here, some there, some wandering, some settled in kindreds or small peoples; 
and the most part of them soon learned the Grey-elven tongue, both as a 
common speech among themselves and because many were eager to learn the 
lore of the Elves. But after a time the Elf-kings, seeing that it was not good for 
Elves and Men to dwell mingled together without order, and that Men needed 
lords of their own kind, set regions apart where Men could live their own lives, 
and appointed chieftains to hold these lands freely. They were the allies of the 
Eldar in war, but marched under their own leaders. Yet many of the Edain had 
delight in the friendship of the Elves, and dwelt among them for so long as they 
had leave; and the young men often took service for a time in the hosts of the 
kings. 

Now Hador Lorindol, son of Hathol, son of Magor, son of Malach Aradan, 
entered the household of Fingolfin in his youth, and was loved by the King. 
Fingolfin therefore gave to him the lordship of Dor-lomin, and into that land he 
gathered most of the people of his kin, and became the mightiest of the 
chieftains of the Edain. In his house only the Elven-tongue was spoken; but their 
own speech was not forgotten, and from it came the common tongue of 
Numenor. But in Dorthonion the lordship of the people of Beor and the country 
of Ladros was given to Boromir, son of Boron, who was the grandson of Beor 
the Old. 

The sons of Hador were Galdor and Gundor; and the sons of Galdor were 
Hurin and Huor; and the son of Hurin was Turin the Bane of Glaurung; and the 
son of Huor was Tuor, father of Earendil the Blessed. The son of Boromir was 
Bregor, whose sons were Bregolas and Barahir; and the sons of Bregolas were 
Baragund and Belegund. The daughter of Baragund was Morwen, the mother of 
Turin, and the daughter of Belegund was Rian, the mother of Tuor. But the son 
of Barahir was Beren One-hand, who won the love of Luthien Thingol’s 
daughter, and returned from the Dead; from them came Elwing the wife of 
Earendil, and all the Kings of Numenor after. 

All these were caught in the net of the Doom of the Noldor; and they did great 
deeds which the Eldar remember still among the histories of the Kings of old. 
And in those days the strength of Men was added to the power of the Noldor, 
and their hope was high; and Morgoth was straitly enclosed, for the people of 
Hador, being hardy to endure cold and long wandering, feared not at times to go 
far into the north and there keep watch upon the movements of the Enemy. The 
Men of the Three Houses throve and multiplied, but greatest among them was 
the house of Hador Goldenhead, peer of Elven-lords. His people were of great 
strength and stature, ready in mind, bold and steadfast, quick to anger and to 



laughter, mighty among the Children of Ilhvatar in the youth of Mankind. 
Yellow-haired they were for the most part, and blue-eyed; but not so was Turin, 
whose mother was Morwen of the house of Beor. The Men of that house were 
dark or brown of hair, with grey eyes; and of all Men they were most like to the 
Noldor and most loved by them; for they were eager of mind, cunning-handed, 
swift in understanding, long in memory, and they were moved sooner to pity 
than to laughter. Like to them were the woodland folk of Haleth, but they were 
of lesser stature, and less eager for lore. They used few words, and did not love 
great concourse of men; and many among them delighted in solitude, wandering 
free in the greenwoods while the wonder of the lands of the Eldar was new upon 
them. But in the realms of the West their time was brief and their days unhappy. 

The years of the Edain were lengthened, according to the reckoning of Men, 
after their coming to Beleriand; but at last Beor the Old died when he had lived 
three and ninety years, for four and forty of which he had served King Felagund. 
And when he lay dead, of no wound or grief, but stricken by age, the Eldar saw 
for the first time the swift waning of the life of Men, and the death of weariness 
which they knew not in themselves; and they grieved greatly for the loss of their 
friends. But Beor at the last had relinquished his life willingly and passed in 
peace; and the Eldar wondered much at the strange fate of Men, for in all their 
lore there was no account of it, and its end was hidden from them. 

Nonetheless the Edain of old learned swiftly of the Eldar all such art and 
knowledge as they could receive, and their sons increased in wisdom and skill, 
until they far surpassed all others of Mankind, who dwelt still east of the 
mountains and had not seen the Eldar, nor looked upon the faces that had beheld 
the Light of Valinor. 











CHAPTER 18 



OF THE RUIN OF BELERIAND AND THE FALL OF 

FINGOLFIN 


Now Fingolfin, King of the North, and High King of the Noldor, seeing that his 
people were become numerous and strong, and that the Men allied to them were 
many and valiant, pondered once more an assault upon Angband; for he knew 
that they lived in danger while the circle of the siege was incomplete, and 
Morgoth was free to labour in his deep mines, devising what evils none could 
foretell ere he should reveal them. This counsel was wise according to the 
measure of his knowledge; for the Noldor did not yet comprehend the fullness of 
the power of Morgoth, nor understand that their unaided war upon him was 
without final hope, whether they hasted or delayed. But because the land was 
fair and their kingdoms wide, most of the Noldor were content with things as 
they were, trusting them to last, and slow to begin an assault in which many 
must surely perish were it in victory or in defeat. Therefore they were little 
disposed to hearken to Fingolfin, and the sons of Feanor at that time least of all. 
Among the chieftains of the Noldor Angrod and Aegnor alone were of like mind 
with the King; for they dwelt in regions whence Thangorodrim could be 
descried, and the threat of Morgoth was present to their thought. Thus the 
designs of Fingolfin came to naught, and the land had peace yet for a while. 

But when the sixth generation of Men after Beor and Marach were not yet 
come to full manhood, it being then four hundred years and five and fifty since 
the coming of Fingolfin, the evil befell that he had long dreaded, and yet more 
dire and sudden than his darkest fear. For Morgoth had long prepared his force in 
secret, while ever the malice of his heart grew greater, and his hatred of the 
Noldor more bitter; and he desired not only to end his foes but to destroy also 
and defile the lands that they had taken and made fair. And it is said that his hate 
overcame his counsel, so that if he had but endured to wait longer, until his 
designs were full, then the Noldor would have perished utterly. But on his part 
he esteemed too lightly the valour of the Elves, and of Men he took yet no 
account. 


There came a time of winter, when night was dark and without moon; and the 
wide plain of Ard-galen stretched dim beneath the cold stars, from the hill-forts 
of the Noldor to the feet of Thangorodrim. The watchfires burned low, and the 
guards were few; on the plain few were waking in the camps of the horsemen of 
Hithlum. Then suddenly Morgoth sent forth great rivers of flame that ran down 




swifter than Balrogs from Thangorodrim, and poured over all the plain; and the 
Mountains of Iron belched forth fires of many poisonous hues, and the fume of 
them stank upon the air, and was deadly. Thus Ard-galen perished, and fire 
devoured its grasses; and it became a burned and desolate waste, full of a 
choking dust, barren and lifeless. Thereafter its name was changed, and it was 
called Anfauglith, the Gasping Dust. Many charred bones had there their 
roofless grave; for many of the Noldor perished in that burning, who were 
caught by the running flame and could not fly to the hills. The heights of 
Dorthonion and Ered Wethrin held back the fiery torrents, but their woods upon 
the slopes that looked towards Angband were all kindled, and the smoke 
wrought confusion among the defenders. Thus began the fourth of the great 
battles, Dagor Bragollach, the Battle of Sudden Flame. 

In the front of that fire came Glaurung the golden, father of dragons, in his full 
might; and in his train were Balrogs, and behind them came the black armies of 
the Ores in multitudes such as the Noldor had never before seen or imagined. 
And they assaulted the fortresses of the Noldor, and broke the leaguer about 
Angband, and slew wherever they found them the Noldor and their allies, Grey- 
elves and Men. Many of the stoutest of the foes of Morgoth were destroyed in 
the first days of that war, bewildered and dispersed and unable to muster their 
strength. War ceased not wholly ever again in Beleriand; but the Battle of 
Sudden Flame is held to have ended with the coming of spring, when the 
onslaught of Morgoth grew less. 

Thus ended the Siege of Angband; and the foes of Morgoth were scattered and 
sundered one from another. The most part of the Grey-elves fled south and 
forsook the northern war; many were received into Doriath, and the kingdom 
and strength of Thingol grew greater in that time, for the power of Melian the 
queen was woven about his borders and evil could not yet enter that hidden 
realm. Others took refuge in the fortresses by the sea, and in Nargothrond; and 
some fled the land and hid themselves in Ossiriand, or passing the mountains 
wandered homeless in the wild. And rumour of the war and the breaking of the 
siege reached the ears of Men in the east of Middle-earth. 

The sons of Finarfin bore most heavily the brunt of the assault, and Angrod 
and Aegnor were slain; beside them fell Bregolas lord of the house of Beor, and 
a great part of the warriors of that people. But Barahir the brother of Bregolas 
was in the fighting further westward, near to the Pass of Sirion. There King 
Finrod Felagund, hastening from the south, was cut off from his people and 
surrounded with small company in the Fen of Serech; and he would have been 
slain or taken, but Barahir came up with the bravest of his men and rescued him, 
and made a wall of spears about him; and they cut their way out of the battle 



with great loss. Thus Felagund escaped, and returned to his deep fortress of 
Nargothrond; but he swore an oath of abiding friendship and aid in every need to 
Barahir and all his kin, and in token of his vow he gave to Barahir his ring. 
Barahir was now by right lord of the house of Beor, and he returned to 
Dorthonion; but most of his people fled from their homes and took refuge in the 
fastness of Hithlum. 

So great was the onslaught of Morgoth that Fingolfin and Fingon could not 
come to the aid of the sons of Finarfin; and the hosts of Hithlum were driven 
back with great loss to the fortresses of Ered Wethrin, and these they hardly 
defended against the Ores. Before the walls of Eithel Sirion fell Hador the 
Golden-haired, defending the rearguard of his lord Fingolfin, being then sixty 
and six years of age, and with him fell Gundor his younger son, pierced with 
many arrows; and they were mourned by the Elves. Then Galdor the Tall took 
the lordship of his father. And because of the strength and height of the Shadowy 
Mountains, which withstood the torrent of fire, and by the valour of the Elves 
and the Men of the North, which neither Ore nor Balrog could yet overcome, 
Hithlum remained unconquered, a threat upon the flank of Morgoth’s attack; but 
Fingolfin was sundered from his kinsmen by a sea of foes. 

For the war had gone ill with the sons of Feanor, and well nigh all the east 
marches were taken by assault. The Pass of Aglon was forced, though with great 
cost to the hosts of Morgoth; and Celegorm and Curufin being defeated fled 
south and west by the marches of Doriath, and coming at last to Nargothrond 
sought harbour with Finrod Felagund. Thus it came to pass that their people 
swelled the strength of Nargothrond; but it would have been better, as was after 
seen, if they had remained in the east among their own kin. Maedhros did deeds 
of surpassing valour, and the Ores fled before his face; for since his torment 
upon Thangorodrim his spirit burned like a white fire within, and he was as one 
that returns from the dead. Thus the great fortress upon the Hill of Himring 
could not be taken, and many of the most valiant that remained, both of the 
people of Dorthonion and of the east marches, rallied there to Maedhros; and for 
a while he closed once more the Pass of Aglon, so that the Ores could not enter 
Beleriand by that road. But they overwhelmed the riders of the people of Feanor 
upon Lothlann, for Glaurung came thither, and passed through Maglor’s Gap, 
and destroyed all the land between the arms of Gelion. And the Ores took the 
fortress upon the west slopes of Mount Rerir, and ravaged all Thargelion, the 
land of Caranthir; and they defiled Lake Helevorn. Thence they passed over 
Gelion with fire and terror and came far into East Beleriand. Maglor joined 
Maedhros upon Himring; but Caranthir fled and joined the remnant of his people 
to the scattered folk of the hunters, Amrod and Amras, and they retreated and 



passed Ramdal in the south. Upon Amon Ereb they maintained a watch and 
some strength of war, and they had aid of the Green-elves; and the Ores came 
not into Ossiriand, nor to Taur-im-Duinath and the wilds of the south. 

Now news came to Hithlum that Dorthonion was lost and the sons of Finarfin 
overthrown, and that the sons of Feanor were driven from their lands. Then 
Fingolfin beheld (as it seemed to him) the utter ruin of the Noldor, and the defeat 
beyond redress of all their houses; and filled with wrath and despair he mounted 
upon Rochallor his great horse and rode forth alone, and none might restrain 
him. He passed over Dor-nu-Fauglith like a wind amid the dust, and all that 
beheld his onset fled in amaze, thinking that Orome himself was come: for a 
great madness of rage was upon him, so that his eyes shone like the eyes of the 
Valar. Thus he came alone to Angband’s gates, and he sounded his horn, and 
smote once more upon the brazen doors, and challenged Morgoth to come forth 
to single combat. And Morgoth came. 

That was the last time in those wars that he passed the doors of his stronghold, 
and it is said that he took not the challenge willingly; for though his might was 
greatest of all things in this world, alone of the Valar he knew fear. But he could 
not now deny the challenge before the face of his captains; for the rocks rang 
with the shrill music of Fingolfin’s horn, and his voice came keen and clear 
down into the depths of Angband; and Fingolfin named Morgoth craven, and 
lord of slaves. Therefore Morgoth came, climbing slowly from his subterranean 
throne, and the rumour of his feet was like thunder underground. And he issued 
forth clad in black armour; and he stood before the King like a tower, iron- 
crowned, and his vast shield, sable unblazoned, cast a shadow over him like a 
stormcloud. But Fingolfin gleamed beneath it as a star; for his mail was overlaid 
with silver, and his blue shield was set with crystals; and he drew his sword 
Ringil, that glittered like ice. 

Then Morgoth hurled aloft Grond, the Hammer of the Underworld, and swung 
it down like a bolt of thunder. But Fingolfin sprang aside, and Grond rent a 
mighty pit in the earth, whence smoke and fire darted. Many times Morgoth 
essayed to smite him, and each time Fingolfin leaped away, as a lightning shoots 
from under a dark cloud; and he wounded Morgoth with seven wounds, and 
seven times Morgoth gave a cry of anguish, whereat the hosts of Angband fell 
upon their faces in dismay, and the cries echoed in the Northlands. 

But at the last the King grew weary, and Morgoth bore down his shield upon 
him. Thrice he was crushed to his knees, and thrice arose again and bore up his 
broken shield and stricken helm. But the earth was all rent and pitted about him, 
and he stumbled and fell backward before the feet of Morgoth; and Morgoth set 
his left foot upon his neck, and the weight of it was like a fallen hill. Yet with his 



last and desperate stroke Fingolfin hewed the foot with Ringil, and the blood 
gushed forth black and smoking and filled the pits of Grand. 

Thus died Fingolfin, High King of the Noldor, most proud and valiant of the 
Elven-kings of old. The Ores made no boast of that duel at the gate; neither do 
the Elves sing of it, for their sorrow is too deep. Yet the tale of it is remembered 
still, for Thorondor King of Eagles brought the tidings to Gondolin, and to 
Hithlum afar off. And Morgoth took the body of the Elven-king and broke it, and 
would cast it to his wolves; but Thorondor came hasting from his eyrie among 
the peaks of the Crissaegrim, and he stooped upon Morgoth and marred his face. 
The rushing of the wings of Thorondor was like the noise of the winds of 
Manwe, and he seized the body in his mighty talons, and soaring suddenly above 
the darts of the Ores he bore the King away. And he laid him upon a mountain- 
top that looked from the north upon the hidden valley of Gondolin; and Turgon 
coming built a high cairn over his father. No Ore dared ever after to pass over 
the mount of Fingolfin or draw nigh his tomb, until the doom of Gondolin was 
come and treachery was born among his kin. Morgoth went ever halt of one foot 
after that day, and the pain of his wounds could not be healed; and in his face 
was the scar that Thorondor made. 

Great was the lamentation in Hithlum when the fall of Fingolfin became 
known, and Fingon in sorrow took the lordship of the house of Fingolfin and the 
kingdom of the Noldor; but his young son Ereinion (who was after named Gil- 
galad) he sent to the Havens. 


Now Morgoth’s power overshadowed the Northlands; but Barahir would not 
flee from Dorthonion, and remained contesting the land foot by foot with his 
enemies. Then Morgoth pursued his people to the death, until few remained; and 
all the forest of the northward slopes of that land was turned little by little into a 
region of such dread and dark enchantment that even the Ores would not enter it 
unless need drove them, and it was called Delduwath, and Taur-nu-Fuin, The 
Forest under Nightshade. The trees that grew there after the burning were black 
and grim, and their roots were tangled, groping in the dark like claws; and those 
who strayed among them became lost and blind, and were strangled or pursued 
to madness by phantoms of terror. At last so desperate was the case of Barahir 
that Emeldir the Manhearted his wife (whose mind was rather to fight beside her 
son and her husband than to flee) gathered together all the women and children 
that were left, and gave arms to those that would bear them; and she led them 
into the mountains that lay behind, and so by perilous paths, until they came at 
last with loss and misery to Brethil. Some were there received among the 



Haladin, but some passed on over the mountains to Dorlomin and the people of 
Galdor, Hador’s son; and among those were Rian, daughter of Belegund, and 
Morwen, who was named Eledhwen, that is Elfsheen, daughter of Baragund. But 
none ever saw again the men that they had left. For these were slain one by one, 
until at last only twelve men remained to Barahir: Beren his son, and Baragund 
and Belegund his nephews, the sons of Bregolas, and nine faithful servants of his 
house whose names were long remembered in the songs of the Noldor: Radhruin 
and Dairuin they were, Dagnir and Ragnor, Gildor and Gorlim the unhappy, 
Arthad and Urthel, and Hathaldir the young. Outlaws without hope they became, 
a desperate band that could not escape and would not yield, for their dwellings 
were destroyed, and their wives and children captured, slain, or fled. From 
Hithlum there came neither news nor help, and Barahir and his men were hunted 
like wild beasts; and they retreated to the barren highland above the forest, and 
wandered among the tarns and rocky moors of that region, furthest from the 
spies and spells of Morgoth. Their bed was the heather and their roof the cloudy 
sky. 





For nigh on two years after the Dagor Bragollach the Noldor still defended the 
western pass about the sources of Sirion, for the power of Ulmo was in that 
water, and Minas Tirith withstood the Ores. But at length, after the fall of 
Fingolfin, Sauron, greatest and most terrible of the servants of Morgoth, who in 
the Sindarin tongue was named Gorthaur, came against Orodreth, the warden of 
the tower upon Tol Sirion. Sauron was become now a sorcerer of dreadful 
power, master of shadows and of phantoms, foul in wisdom, cruel in strength, 
misshaping what he touched, twisting what he ruled, lord of werewolves; his 
dominion was torment. He took Minas Tirith by assault, for a dark cloud of fear 
fell upon those that defended it; and Orodreth was driven out, and fled to 
Nargothrond. Then Sauron made it into a watch-tower for Morgoth, a stronghold 
of evil, and a menace; and the fair isle of Tol Sirion became accursed, and it was 
called Tol-in-Gaurhoth, the Isle of Werewolves. No living creature could pass 
through that vale that Sauron did not espy from the tower where he sat. And 
Morgoth held now the western pass, and his terror filled the fields and woods of 
Beleriand. Beyond Hithlum he pursued his foes relentlessly, and he searched out 
their hiding-places and took their strongholds one by one. The Ores growing 
ever bolder wandered at will far and wide, coming down Sirion in the west and 
Celon in the east, and they encompassed Doriath; and they harried the lands so 
that beast and bird fled before them, and silence and desolation spread steadily 
from the North. Many of the Noldor and the Sindar they took captive and led to 
Angband, and made them thralls, forcing them to use their skill and their 
knowledge in the service of Morgoth. And Morgoth sent out his spies, and they 
were clad in false forms and deceit was in their speech; they made lying 
promises of reward, and with cunning words sought to arouse fear and jealousy 
among the peoples, accusing their kings and chieftains of greed, and of treachery 
one to another. And because of the curse of the Kinslaying at Alqualonde these 
lies were often believed; and indeed as the time darkened they had a measure of 
truth, for the hearts and minds of the Elves of Beleriand became clouded with 
despair and fear. But ever the Noldor feared most the treachery of those of their 
own kin, who had been thralls in Angband; for Morgoth used some of these for 
his evil purposes, and feigning to give them liberty sent them abroad, but their 
wills were chained to his, and they strayed only to come back to him again. 
Therefore if any of his captives escaped in truth, and returned to their own 
people, they had little welcome, and wandered alone outlawed and desperate. 

To Men Morgoth feigned pity, if any would hearken to his messages, saying 



that their woes came only of their servitude to the rebel Noldor, but at the hands 
of the rightful Lord of Middle-earth they would get honour and a just reward of 
valour, if they would leave rebellion. But few men of the Three Houses of the 
Edain would give ear to him, not even were they brought to the torment of 
Angband. Therefore Morgoth pursued them with hatred; and he sent his 
messengers over the mountains. 

It is told that at this time the Swarthy Men came first into Beleriand. Some 
were already secretly under the dominion of Morgoth, and came at his call; but 
not all, for the rumour of Beleriand, of its lands and waters, of its wars and 
riches, went now far and wide, and the wandering feet of Men were ever set 
westward in those days. These Men were short and broad, long and strong in the 
arm; their skins were swart or sallow, and their hair was dark as were their eyes. 
Their houses were many, and some had greater liking for the Dwarves of the 
mountains than for the Elves. But Maedhros, knowing the weakness of the 
Noldor and the Edain, whereas the pits of Angband seemed to hold store 
inexhaustible and ever-renewed, made alliance with these new-come Men, and 
gave his friendship to the greatest of their chieftains, Bor and Ulfang. And 
Morgoth was well content; for this was as he had designed. The sons of Bor 
were Borlad, Borlach, and Borthand; and they followed Maedhros and Maglor, 
and cheated the hope of Morgoth, and were faithful. The sons of Ulfang the 
Black were Ulfast, and Ulwarth, and Uldor the accursed; and they followed 
Caranthir and swore allegiance to him, and proved faithless. 

There was small love between the Edain and the Easterlings, and they met 
seldom; for the newcomers abode long in East Beleriand, but Hador’s folk were 
shut in Hithlum, and Beor’s house was wellnigh destroyed. The People of Haleth 
were at first untouched by the northern war, for they dwelt to the southward in 
the Forest of Brethil; but now there was battle between them and the invading 
Ores, for they were stout-hearted men and would not lightly forsake the woods 
that they loved. And amid the tale of defeats of that time the deeds of the 
Haladin are remembered with honour: for after the taking of Minas Tirith the 
Ores came through the western pass, and maybe would have ravaged even to the 
mouths of Sirion; but Halmir lord of the Haladin sent swift word to Thingol, for 
he had friendship with the Elves that guarded the borders of Doriath. Then Beleg 
Strongbow, chief of the marchwardens of Thingol, brought great strength of the 
Sindar armed with axes into Brethil; and issuing from the deeps of the forest 
Halmir and Beleg took an Orc-legion at unawares and destroyed it. Thereafter 
the black tide out of the North was stemmed in that region, and the Ores dared 
not cross the Teiglin for many years after. The People of Haleth dwelt yet in 
watchful peace in the Forest of Brethil, and behind their guard the Kingdom of 



Nargothrond had respite, and mustered its strength. 

At this time Hurin and Huor, the sons of Galdor of Dorlomin, were dwelling 
with the Haladin, for they were akin. In the days before the Dagor Bragollach 
those two houses of the Edain were joined at a great feast, when Galdor and 
Gloredhel the children of Hador Goldenhead were wedded to Hareth and Haldir 
the children of Halmir lord of the Haladin. Thus it was that the sons of Galdor 
were fostered in Brethil by Haldir their uncle, according to the custom of Men in 
that time; and they went both to that battle with the Ores, even Huor, for he 
would not be restrained, though he was but thirteen years old. But being with a 
company that was cut off from the rest they were pursued to the Ford of 
Brithiach, and there they would have been taken or slain but for the power of 
Ulmo, that was still strong in Sirion. A mist arose from the river and hid them 
from their enemies, and they escaped over the Brithiach into Dimbar, and 
wandered among the hills beneath the sheer walls of the Crissaegrim, until they 
were bewildered in the deceits of that land and knew not the way to go on or to 
return. There Thorondor espied them, and he sent two of his eagles to their aid; 
and the eagles bore them up and brought them beyond the Encircling Mountains 
to the secret vale of Tumladen and the hidden city of Gondolin, which no Man 
yet had seen. 

There Turgon the King received them well, when he learned of their kin; for 
messages and dreams had come to him up Sirion from the sea, from Ulmo, Lord 
of Waters, warning him of woe to come and counselling him to deal kindly with 
the sons of the house of Hador, from whom help should come to him at need. 
Hurin and Huor dwelt as guests in the King’s house for well nigh a year; and it is 
said that in this time Hurin learned much lore of the Elves, and understood also 
something of the counsels and purposes of the King. For Turgon took great 
liking for the sons of Galdor, and spoke much with them; and he wished indeed 
to keep them in Gondolin out of love, and not only for his law that no stranger, 
be he Elf or Man, who found the way to the secret kingdom and looked upon the 
city should ever depart again, until the King should open the leaguer, and the 
hidden people should come forth. 

But Hurin and Huor desired to return to their own people and share in the 
wars and griefs that now beset them. And Hurin said to Turgon: 'Lord, we are 
but mortal Men, and unlike the Eldar. They may endure for long years awaiting 
battle with their enemies in some far distant day; but for us the time is short, and 
our hope and strength soon wither. Moreover we did not find the road to 
Gondolin, and indeed we do not know surely where this city stands; for we were 
brought in fear and wonder by the high ways of the air, and in mercy our eyes 
were veiled.’ Then Turgon granted his prayer, and he said: ‘By the way that you 



came you have leave to depart, if Thorondor is willing. I grieve at this parting; 
yet in a little while, as the Eldar account it, we may meet again.’ 

But Maeglin, the King’s sister-son, who was mighty in Gondolin, grieved not 
at all at their going, though he begrudged them the favour of the King, for he had 
no love for any of the kindred of Men; and he said to Hurin: The King’s grace is 
greater than you know, and the law is become less stern than aforetime; or else 
no choice would be given you but to abide here to your life’s end.’ 

Then Hurin answered him: The King’s grace is great indeed; but if our word 
is not enough, then we will swear oaths to you.’ And the brothers swore never to 
reveal the counsels of Turgon, and to keep secret all that they had seen in his 
realm. Then they took their leave, and the eagles coming bore them away by 
night, and set them down in Dor-lomin before the dawn. Their kinsfolk rejoiced 
to see them, for messengers from Brethil had reported that they were lost; but 
they would not declare even to their father where they had been, save that they 
were rescued in the wilderness by the eagles that brought them home. But 
Galdor said: ‘Did you then dwell a year in the wild? Or did the eagles house you 
in their eyries? But you found food and fine raiment, and return as young 
princes, not as waifs of the wood.’ And Hurin answered: ‘Be content that we 
have returned; for only under an oath of silence was this permitted.’ Then Galdor 
questioned them no more, but he and many others guessed at the truth; and in 
time the strange fortune of Hurin and Huor reached the ears of the servants of 
Morgoth. 

Now when Turgon learned of the breaking of the leaguer of Angband he 
would not suffer any of his own people to issue forth to war; for he deemed that 
Gondolin was strong, and the time not yet ripe for its revealing. But he believed 
also that the ending of the Siege was the beginning of the downfall of the 
Noldor, unless aid should come; and he sent companies of the Gondolindrim in 
secret to the mouths of Sirion and the Isle of Balar. There they built ships, and 
set sail into the uttermost West upon Turgon’s errand, seeking for Valinor, to ask 
for pardon and aid of the Valar; and they besought the birds of the sea to guide 
them. But the seas were wild and wide, and shadow and enchantment lay upon 
them; and Valinor was hidden. Therefore none of the messengers of Turgon 
came into the West, and many were lost and few returned; but the doom of 
Gondolin drew nearer. 

Rumour came to Morgoth of these things, and he was unquiet amid his 
victories; and he desired greatly to learn tidings of Felagund and Turgon. For 
they had vanished out of knowledge, and yet were not dead; and he feared what 
they might yet accomplish against him. Of Nargothrond he knew indeed the 
name, but neither its place nor its strength; and of Gondolin he knew nothing, 



and the thought of Turgon troubled him the more. Therefore he sent forth ever 
more spies into Beleriand; but he recalled the main hosts of the Ores to 
Angband, for he perceived that he could not yet make a final and victorious 
battle until he had gathered new strength, and that he had not measured rightly 
the valour of the Noldor nor the might in arms of the Men that fought beside 
them. Great though his victory had been in the Bragollach and in the years after, 
and grievous the harm that he had done to his enemies, his own loss had been no 
less; and though he held Dorthonion and the Pass of Sirion, the Eldar recovering 
from their first dismay began now to regain what they had lost. Thus Beleriand 
in the south had a semblance of peace again for a few brief years; but the forges 
of Angband were full of labour. 

When seven years had passed since the Fourth Battle, Morgoth renewed his 
assault, and he sent a great force against Hithlum. The attack on the passes of the 
Shadowy Mountains was bitter, and in the siege of Eithel Sirion Galdor the tall, 
Lord of Dor-lomin, was slain by an arrow. That fortress he held on behalf of 
Fingon the High King; and in that same place his father Hador Lorindol died but 
a little time before. Hurin his son was then newly come to manhood, but he was 
great in strength both of mind and body; and he drove the Ores with heavy 
slaughter from Ered Wethrin, and pursued them far across the sands of 
Anfauglith. 

But King Fingon was hard put to it to hold back the army of Angband that 
came down from the north; and battle was joined upon the very plains of 
Hithlum. There Fingon was outnumbered; but the ships of Cirdan sailed in great 
strength up the Firth of Drengist, and in the hour of need the Elves of the Falas 
came upon the host of Morgoth from the west. Then the Ores broke and fled, and 
the Eldar had the victory, and their horsed archers pursued them even into the 
Iron Mountains. 

Thereafter Hurin son of Galdor ruled the house of Hador in Dor-lomin, and 
served Fingon. Hurin was of less stature than his fathers, or his son after him; 
but he was tireless and enduring in body, lithe and swift after the manner of his 
mother’s kin, Hareth of the Haladin. His wife was Morwen Eledhwen, daughter 
of Baragund of the house of Beor, she who fled from Dorthonion with Rian 
daughter of Belegund and Emeldir the mother of Beren. 

In that time also the outlaws of Dorthonion were destroyed, as is told 
hereafter; and Beren son of Barahir alone escaping came hardly into Doriath. 







CHAPTER 19 



OF BEREN AND LUTHIEN 


Among the tales of sorrow and of min that come down to us from the darkness 
of those days there are yet some in which amid weeping there is joy and under 
the shadow of death light that endures. And of these histories most fair still in 
the ears of the Elves is the tale of Beren and Luthien. Of their lives was made the 
Lay of Leithian, Release from Bondage, which is the longest save one of the 
songs concerning the world of old; but here the tale is told in fewer words and 
without song. 

It has been told that Barahir would not forsake Dorthonion, and there Morgoth 
pursued him to the death, until at last there remained to him only twelve 
companions. Now the forest of Dorthonion rose southward into mountainous 
moors; and in the east of those highlands there lay a lake, Tarn Aeluin, with wild 
heaths about it, and all that land was pathless and untamed, for even in the days 
of the Long Peace none had dwelt there. But the waters of Tarn Aeluin were held 
in reverence, for they were clear and blue by day and by night were a mirror for 
the stars; and it was said that Melian herself had hallowed that water in days of 
old. Thither Barahir and his outlaws withdrew, and there made their lair, and 
Morgoth could not discover it. But the rumour of the deeds of Barahir and his 
companions went far and wide; and Morgoth commanded Sauron to find them 
and destroy them. 

Now among the companions of Barahir was Gorlim son of Angrim. His wife 
was named Eilinel, and their love was great, ere evil befell. But Gorlim returning 
from the war upon the marches found his house plundered and forsaken, and his 
wife gone; whether slain or taken he knew not. Then he fled to Barahir, and of 
his companions he was the most fierce and desperate; but doubt gnawed his 
heart, thinking that perhaps Eilinel was not dead. At times he would depart alone 
and secretly, and visit his house that still stood amid the fields and woods he had 
once possessed; and this became known to the servants of Morgoth. 

On a time of autumn he came in the dusk of evening, and drawing near he saw 
as he thought a light at the window; and coming warily he looked within. There 
he saw Eilinel, and her face was worn with grief and hunger, and it seemed to 
him that he heard her voice lamenting that he had forsaken her. But even as he 
cried aloud the light was blown out in the wind; wolves howled, and on his 
shoulders he felt suddenly the heavy hands of Sauron’s hunters. Thus Gorlim 
was ensnared; and taking him to their camp they tormented him, seeking to learn 
the hidings of Barahir and all his ways. But nothing would Gorlim tell. Then 
they promised him that he should be released and restored to Eilinel, if he would 



yield; and being at last worn with pain, and yearning for his wife, he faltered. 
Then straightway they brought him into the dreadful presence of Sauron; and 
Sauron said: T hear now that thou wouldst barter with me. What is thy price?’ 

And Gorlim answered that he should find Eilinel again, and with her be set 
free; for he thought that Eilinel also had been made captive. 

Then Sauron smiled, saying: ‘That is a small price for so great a treachery. So 
shall it surely be. Say on!’ 

Now Gorlim would have drawn back, but daunted by the eyes of Sauron he 
told at last all that he would know. Then Sauron laughed; and he mocked 
Gorlim, and revealed to him that he had seen only a phantom devised by 
wizardry to entrap him; for Eilinel was dead. ‘Nonetheless I will grant thy 
prayer,’ said Sauron; ‘and thou shalt go to Eilinel, and be set free of my service.’ 
Then he put him cruelly to death. 

In this way the hiding of Barahir was revealed, and Morgoth drew his net 
about it; and the Ores coming in the still hours before dawn surprised the Men of 
Dorthonion and slew them all, save one. For Beren son of Barahir had been sent 
by his father on a perilous errand to spy upon the ways of the Enemy, and he was 
far afield when the lair was taken. But as he slept benighted in the forest he 
dreamed that carrion-birds sat thick as leaves upon bare trees beside a mere, and 
blood dripped from their beaks. Then Beren was aware in his dream of a form 
that came to him across the water, and it was a wraith of Gorlim; and it spoke to 
him declaring his treachery and death, and bade him make haste to warn his 
father. 

Then Beren awoke, and sped through the night, and came back to the lair of 
the outlaws on the second morning. But as he drew near the carrion-birds rose 
from the ground and sat in the alder-trees beside Tarn Aeluin, and croaked in 
mockery. 

There Beren buried his father’s bones, and raised a cairn of boulders above 
him, and swore upon it an oath of vengeance. First therefore he pursued the Ores 
that had slain his father and his kinsmen, and he found their camp by night at 
Rivil’s Well above the Fen of Serech, and because of his woodcraft he came near 
to their fire unseen. There their captain made boast of his deeds, and he held up 
the hand of Barahir that he had cut off as a token for Sauron that their mission 
was fulfilled; and the ring of Felagund was on that hand. Then Beren sprang 
from behind a rock, and slew the captain, and taking the hand and the ring he 
escaped, being defended by fate; for the Ores were dismayed, and their arrows 
wild. 


















Thereafter for four years more Beren wandered still upon Dorthonion, a 
solitary outlaw; but he became the friend of birds and beasts, and they aided him, 
and did not betray him, and from that time forth he ate no flesh nor slew any 
living thing that was not in the service of Morgoth. He did not fear death, but 
only captivity, and being bold and desperate he escaped both death and bonds; 
and the deeds of lonely daring that he achieved were noised abroad throughout 
Beleriand, and the tale of them came even into Doriath. At length Morgoth set a 
price upon his head no less than the price upon the head of Fingon, High King of 
the Noldor; but the Ores fled rather at the rumour of his approach than sought 
him out. Therefore an army was sent against him under the command of Sauron; 
and Sauron brought were-wolves, fell beasts inhabited by dreadful spirits that he 
had imprisoned in their bodies. 

All that land was now become filled with evil, and all clean things were 
departing from it; and Beren was pressed so hard that at last he was forced to 
flee from Dorthonion. In time of winter and snow he forsook the land and grave 
of his father, and climbing into the high regions of Gorgoroth, the Mountains of 
Terror, he descried afar the land of Doriath. There it was put into his heart that he 
would go down into the Hidden Kingdom, where no mortal foot had yet trodden. 

Terrible was his southward journey. Sheer were the precipices of Ered 
Gorgoroth, and beneath their feet were shadows that were laid before the rising 
of the Moon. Beyond lay the wilderness of Dungortheb, where the sorcery of 
Sauron and the power of Melian came together, and horror and madness walked. 
There spiders of the fell race of Ungoliant abode, spinning their unseen webs in 
which all living things were snared; and monsters wandered there that were born 
in the long dark before the Sun, hunting silently with many eyes. No food for 
Elves or Men was there in that haunted land, but death only. That journey is not 
accounted least among the great deeds of Beren, but he spoke of it to no one 
after, lest the horror return into his mind; and none know how he found a way, 
and so came by paths that no Man nor Elf else ever dared to tread to the borders 
of Doriath. And he passed through the mazes that Melian wove about the 
kingdom of Thingol, even as she had foretold; for a great doom lay upon him. 

It is told in the Lay of Leithian that Beren came stumbling into Doriath grey 
and bowed as with many years of woe, so great had been the torment of the road. 
But wandering in the summer in the woods of Neldoreth he came upon Luthien, 
daughter of Thingol and Melian, at a time of evening under moonrise, as she 
danced upon the unfading grass in the glades beside Esgalduin. Then all memory 



of his pain departed from him, and he fell into an enchantment; for Luthien was 
the most beautiful of all the Children of Iluvatar. Blue was her raiment as the 
unclouded heaven, but her eyes were grey as the starlit evening; her mantle was 
sewn with golden flowers, but her hair was dark as the shadows of twilight. As 
the light upon the leaves of trees, as the voice of clear waters, as the stars above 
the mists of the world, such was her glory and her loveliness; and in her face was 
a shining light. 

But she vanished from his sight; and he became dumb, as one that is bound 
under a spell, and he strayed long in the woods, wild and wary as a beast, 
seeking for her. In his heart he called her Tinuviel, that signifies Nightingale, 
daughter of twilight, in the Grey-elven tongue, for he knew no other name for 
her. And he saw her afar as leaves in the winds of autumn, and in winter as a star 
upon a hill, but a chain was upon his limbs. 

There came a time near dawn on the eve of spring, and Luthien danced upon a 
green hill; and suddenly she began to sing. Keen, heart-piercing was her song as 
the song of the lark that rises from the gates of night and pours its voice among 
the dying stars, seeing the sun behind the walls of the world; and the song of 
Luthien released the bonds of winter, and the frozen waters spoke, and flowers 
sprang from the cold earth where her feet had passed. 

Then the spell of silence fell from Beren, and he called to her, crying Tinuviel; 
and the woods echoed the name. Then she halted in wonder, and fled no more, 
and Beren came to her. But as she looked on him, doom fell upon her, and she 
loved him; yet she slipped from his arms and vanished from his sight even as the 
day was breaking. Then Beren lay upon the ground in a swoon, as one slain at 
once by bliss and grief; and he fell into a sleep as it were into an abyss of 
shadow, and waking he was cold as stone, and his heart barren and forsaken. 
And wandering in mind he groped as one that is stricken with sudden blindness, 
and seeks with hands to grasp the vanished light. Thus he began the payment of 
anguish for the fate that was laid on him; and in his fate Luthien was caught, and 
being immortal she shared in his mortality, and being free received his chain; 
and her anguish was greater than any other of the Eldalie has known. 

Beyond his hope she returned to him where he sat in darkness, and long ago in 
the Hidden Kingdom she laid her hand in his. Thereafter often she came to him, 
and they went in secret through the woods together from spring to summer; and 
no others of the Children of Iluvatar have had joy so great, though the time was 
brief. 

But Daeron the minstrel also loved Luthien, and he espied her meetings with 
Beren, and betrayed them to Thingol. Then the King was filled with anger, for 
Luthien he loved above all things, setting her above all the princes of the Elves; 



whereas mortal Men he did not even take into his service. Therefore he spoke in 
grief and amazement to Luthien; but she would reveal nothing, until he swore an 
oath to her that he would neither slay Beren nor imprison him. But he sent his 
servants to lay hands on him and lead him to Menegroth as a malefactor; and 
Luthien forestalling them led Beren herself before the throne of Thingol, as if he 
were an honoured guest. 

Then Thingol looked upon Beren in scorn and anger; but Melian was silent. 
‘Who are you/ said the King, ‘that come hither as a thief, and unbidden dare to 
approach my throne?’ 

But Beren being filled with dread, for the splendour of Menegroth and the 
majesty of Thingol were very great, answered nothing. Therefore Luthien spoke, 
and said: ‘He is Beren son of Barahir, lord of Men, mighty foe of Morgoth, the 
tale of whose deeds is become a song even among the Elves.’ 

‘Let Beren speak!’ said Thingol. ‘What would you here, unhappy mortal, and 
for what cause have you left your own land to enter this, which is forbidden to 
such as you? Can you show reason why my power should not be laid on you in 
heavy punishment for your insolence and folly?’ 

Then Beren looking up beheld the eyes of Luthien, and his glance went also to 
the face of Melian; and it seemed to him that words were put into his mouth. 
Fear left him, and the pride of the eldest house of Men returned to him; and he 
said: ‘My fate, O King, led me hither, through perils such as few even of the 
Elves would dare. And here I have found what I sought not indeed, but finding I 
would possess for ever. For it is above all gold and silver, and beyond all jewels. 
Neither rock, nor steel, nor the fires of Morgoth, nor all the powers of the Elf- 
kingdoms, shall keep from me the treasure that I desire. For Luthien your 
daughter is the fairest of all the Children of the World.’ 

Then silence fell upon the hall, for those that stood there were astounded and 
afraid, and they thought that Beren would be slain. But Thingol spoke slowly, 
saying: ‘Death you have earned with these words; and death you should find 
suddenly, had I not sworn an oath in haste; of which I repent, baseborn mortal, 
who in the realm of Morgoth has learnt to creep in secret as his spies and thralls.’ 

Then Beren answered: ‘Death you can give me earned or unearned; but the 
names I will not take from you of baseborn, nor spy, nor thrall. By the ring of 
Felagund, that he gave to Barahir my father on the battlefield of the North, my 
house has not earned such names from any Elf, be he king or no.’ 

His words were proud, and all eyes looked upon the ring; for he held it now 
aloft, and the green jewels gleamed there that the Noldor had devised in Valinor. 
For this ring was like to twin serpents, whose eyes were emeralds, and their 
heads met beneath a crown of golden flowers, that the one upheld and the other 



devoured; that was the badge of Finarfin and his house. Then Melian leaned to 
Thingol’s side, and in whispered counsel bade him forgo his wrath. Tor not by 
you,’ she said, 'shall Beren be slain; and far and free does his fate lead him in the 
end, yet it is wound with yours. Take heed!’ 

But Thingol looked in silence upon Luthien; and he thought in his heart: 
'Unhappy Men, children of little lords and brief kings, shall such as these lay 
hands on you, and yet live?’ Then breaking the silence he said: ‘I see the ring, 
son of Barahir, and I perceive that you are proud, and deem yourself mighty. But 
a father’s deeds, even had his service been rendered to me, avail not to win the 
daughter of Thingol and Melian. See now! I too desire a treasure that is 
withheld. For rock and steel and the fires of Morgoth keep the jewel that I would 
possess against all the powers of the Elf-kingdoms. Yet I hear you say that bonds 
such as these do not daunt you. Go your way therefore! Bring to me in your hand 
a Silmaril from Morgoth’s crown; and then, if she will, Luthien may set her hand 
in yours. Then you shall have my jewel; and though the fate of Arda lie within 
the Silmarils, yet you shall hold me generous.’ 

Thus he wrought the doom of Doriath, and was ensnared within the curse of 
Mandos. And those that heard these words perceived that Thingol would save 
his oath, and yet send Beren to his death; for they knew that not all the power of 
the Noldor, before the Siege was broken, had availed even to see from afar the 
shining Silmarils of Feanor. For they were set in the Iron Crown, and treasured 
in Angband above all wealth; and Balrogs were about them, and countless 
swords, and strong bars, and unassailable walls, and the dark majesty of 
Morgoth. 

But Beren laughed. 'For little price,’ he said, 'do Elven-kings sell their 
daughters: for gems, and things made by craft. But if this be your will, Thingol, I 
will perform it. And when we meet again my hand shall hold a Silmaril from the 
Iron Crown; for you have not looked the last upon Beren son of Barahir.’ 

Then he looked in the eyes of Melian, who spoke not; and he bade farewell to 
Luthien Tinuviel, and bowing before Thingol and Melian he put aside the guards 
about him, and departed from Menegroth alone. 

Then at last Melian spoke, and she said to Thingol: ‘O King, you have devised 
cunning counsel. But if my eyes have not lost their sight, it is ill for you, whether 
Beren fail in his errand, or achieve it. For you have doomed either your daughter, 
or yourself. And now is Doriath drawn within the fate of a mightier realm.’ 

But Thingol answered: ‘I sell not to Elves or Men those whom I love and 
cherish above all treasure. And if there were hope or fear that Beren should 
come ever back alive to Menegroth, he should not have looked again upon the 
light of heaven, though I had sworn it.’ 



But Luthien was silent, and from that hour she sang not again in Doriath. A 
brooding silence fell upon the woods, and the shadows lengthened in the 
kingdom of Thingol. 


It is told in the Lay of Leithian that Beren passed through Doriath unhindered, 
and came at length to the region of the Twilight Meres, and the Fens of Sirion; 
and leaving Thingol’s land he climbed the hills above the Falls of Sirion, where 
the river plunged underground with great noise. Thence he looked westward, and 
through the mist and rains that lay upon those hills he saw Talath Dirnen, the 
Guarded Plain, stretching between Sirion and Narog; and beyond he descried 
afar the highlands of Taur-en-Faroth that rose above Nargothrond. And being 
destitute, without hope or counsel, he turned his feet thither. 

Upon all that plain the Elves of Nargothrond kept unceasing watch; and every 
hill upon its borders was crowned with hidden towers, and through all its woods 
and fields archers ranged secretly and with great craft. Their arrows were sure 
and deadly, and nothing crept there against their will. Therefore, ere Beren had 
come far upon his road, they were aware of him, and his death was nigh. But 
knowing his danger he held ever aloft the ring of Felagund; and though he saw 
no living thing, because of the stealth of the hunters, he felt that he was watched, 
and cried often aloud: T am Beren son of Barahir, friend of Felagund. Take me 
to the King!’ 

Therefore the hunters slew him not, but assembling they waylaid him, and 
commanded him to halt. But seeing the ring they bowed before him, though he 
was in evil plight, wild and wayworn; and they led him northward and westward, 
going by night lest their paths should be revealed. For at that time there was no 
ford or bridge over the torrent of Narog before the gates of Nargothrond; but 
further to the north, where Ginglith joined Narog, the flood was less, and 
crossing there and turning again southward the Elves led Beren under the light of 
the moon to the dark gates of their hidden halls. 

Thus Beren came before King Finrod Felagund; and Felagund knew him, 
needing no ring to remind him of the kin of Beor and of Barahir. Behind closed 
doors they sat, and Beren told of the death of Barahir, and of all that had befallen 
him in Doriath; and he wept, recalling Luthien and their joy together. But 
Felagund heard his tale in wonder and disquiet; and he knew that the oath he had 
sworn was come upon him for his death, as long before he had foretold to 
Galadriel. He spoke then to Beren in heaviness of heart. Tt is plain that Thingol 
desires your death; but it seems that this doom goes beyond his purpose, and that 
the Oath of Feanor is again at work. For the Silmarils are cursed with an oath of 



hatred, and he that even names them in desire moves a great power from 
slumber; and the sons of Feanor would lay all the Elf-kingdoms in ruin rather 
than suffer any other than themselves to win or possess a Silmaril, for the Oath 
drives them. And now Celegorm and Curufin are dwelling in my halls; and 
though I, Finarfin’s son, am King, they have won a strong power in the realm, 
and lead many of their own people. They have shown friendship to me in every 
need, but I fear that they will show neither love nor mercy to you, if your quest 
be told. Yet my own oath holds; and thus we are all ensnared . 5 

Then King Felagund spoke before his people, recalling the deeds of Barahir, 
and his vow; and he declared that it was laid upon him to aid the son of Barahir 
in his need, and he sought the help of his chieftains. Then Celegorm arose amid 
the throng, and drawing his sword he cried: 'Be he friend or foe, whether demon 
of Morgoth, or Elf, or child of Men, or any other living thing in Arda, neither 
law, nor love, nor league of hell, nor might of the Valar, nor any power of 
wizardry, shall defend him from the pursuing hate of Feanor’s sons, if he take or 
find a Silmaril and keep it. For the Silmarils we alone claim, until the world 
ends . 5 

Many other words he spoke, as potent as were long before in Tirion the words 
of his father that first inflamed the Noldor to rebellion. And after Celegorm 
Curufin spoke, more softly but with no less power, conjuring in the minds of the 
Elves a vision of war and the ruin of Nargothrond. So great a fear did he set in 
their hearts that never after until the time of Turin would any Elf of that realm go 
into open battle; but with stealth and ambush, with wizardry and venomed dart, 
they pursued all strangers, forgetting the bonds of kinship. Thus they fell from 
the valour and freedom of the Elves of old, and their land was darkened. 

And now they murmured that Finarfin’s son was not as a Vala to command 
them, and they turned their faces from him. But the curse of Mandos came upon 
the brothers, and dark thoughts arose in their hearts, thinking to send forth 
Felagund alone to his death, and to usurp, it might be, the throne of Nargothrond; 
for they were of the eldest line of the princes of the Noldor. 

And Felagund seeing that he was forsaken took from his head the silver crown 
of Nargothrond and cast it at his feet, saying: 'Your oaths of faith to me you may 
break, but I must hold my bond. Yet if there be any on whom the shadow of our 
curse has not yet fallen, I should find at least a few to follow me, and should not 
go hence as a beggar that is thrust from the gates.’ There were ten that stood by 
him; and the chief of them, who was named Edrahil, stooping lifted the crown 
and asked that it be given to a steward until Felagund’s return. 'For you remain 
my king, and theirs,’ he said, ‘whatever betide.’ 

Then Felagund gave the crown of Nargothrond to Orodreth his brother to 



govern in his stead; and Celegorm and Curufin said nothing, but they smiled and 
went from the halls. 

On an evening of autumn Felagund and Beren set out from Nargothrond with 
their ten companions; and they journeyed beside Narog to his source in the Falls 
of Ivrin. Beneath the Shadowy Mountains they came upon a company of Ores, 
and slew them all in their camp by night; and they took their gear and their 
weapons. By the arts of Felagund their own forms and faces were changed into 
the likeness of Ores; and thus disguised they came far upon their northward road, 
and ventured into the western pass, between Ered Wethrin and the highlands of 
Taur-nu-Fuin. But Sauron in his tower was ware of them, and doubt took him; 
for they went in haste, and stayed not to report their deeds, as was commanded 
to all the servants of Morgoth that passed that way. Therefore he sent to waylay 
them, and bring them before him. 

Thus befell the contest of Sauron and Felagund which is renowned. For 
Felagund strove with Sauron in songs of power, and the power of the King was 
very great; but Sauron had the mastery, as is told in the Lay of Leithian: 


He chanted a song of wizardry, 

Of piercing, opening, of treachery, 

Revealing, uncovering, betraying. 

Then sudden Felagund there swaying 
Sang in answer a song of staying, 

Resisting, battling against power, 

Of secrets kept, strength like a tower, 

And trust unbroken, freedom, escape; 

Of changing and of shifting shape, 

Of snares eluded, broken traps, 

The prison opening, the chain that snaps. 

Backwards and forwards swayed their song. 
Reeling and foundering, as ever more strong 
The chanting swelled, Felagund fought, 

And all the magic and might he brought 
Of Elvenesse into his words. 

Softly in the gloom they heard the birds 
Singing afar in Nargothrond, 

The sighing of the Sea beyond, 

Beyond the western world, on sand, 

On sand of pearls in Elvenland. 



Then the gloom gathered; darkness growing 
In Valinor, the red blood flowing 
Beside the Sea, where the Noldor slew 
The Foamriders, and stealing drew 
Their white ships with their white sails 
From lamplit havens. The wind wails, 

The wolf howls. The ravens flee. 

The ice mutters in the mouths of the Sea. 

The captives sad in Angband mourn. 

Thunder rumbles, the fires burn — 

And Finrod fell before the throne. 


Then Sauron stripped from them their disguise, and they stood before him 
naked and afraid. But though their kinds were revealed, Sauron could not 
discover their names or their purposes. 

He cast them therefore into a deep pit, dark and silent, and threatened to slay 
them cruelly, unless one would betray the truth to him. From time to time they 
saw two eyes kindled in the dark, and a werewolf devoured one of the 
companions; but none betrayed their lord. 


In the time when Sauron cast Beren into the pit a weight of horror came upon 
Luthien’s heart; and going to Melian for counsel she learned that Beren lay in the 
dungeons of Tol-in-Gaurhoth without hope of rescue. Then Luthien, perceiving 
that no help would come from any other on earth, resolved to fly from Doriath 
and come herself to him; but she sought the aid of Daeron, and he betrayed her 
purpose to the King. Then Thingol was filled with fear and wonder; and because 
he would not deprive Luthien of the lights of heaven, lest she fail and fade, and 
yet would restrain her, he caused a house to be built from which she should not 
escape. Not far from the gates of Menegroth stood the greatest of all the trees in 
the Forest of Neldoreth; and that was a beech-forest and the northern half of the 
kingdom. This mighty beech was named Hirilorn, and it had three trunks, equal 
in girth, smooth in rind, and exceeding tall; no branches grew from them for a 
great height above the ground. Far aloft between the shafts of Hirilorn a wooden 
house was built, and there Luthien was made to dwell; and the ladders were 
taken away and guarded, save only when the servants of Thingol brought her 
such things as she needed. 

It is told in the Lay of Leithian how she escaped from the house in Hirilorn; 



for she put forth her arts of enchantment, and caused her hair to grow to great 
length, and of it she wove a dark robe that wrapped her beauty like a shadow, 
and it was laden with a spell of sleep. Of the strands that remained she twined a 
rope, and she let it down from her window; and as the end swayed above the 
guards that sat beneath the tree they fell into a deep slumber. Then Luthien 
climbed from her prison, and shrouded in her shadowy cloak she escaped from 
all eyes, and vanished out of Doriath. 

It chanced that Celegorm and Curufin went on a hunt through the Guarded 
Plain; and this they did because Sauron, being filled with suspicion, sent forth 
many wolves into the Elf-lands. Therefore they took their hounds and rode forth; 
and they thought that ere they returned they might also hear tidings concerning 
King Felagund. Now the chief of the wolf-hounds that followed Celegorm was 
named Huan. He was not born in Middle-earth, but came from the Blessed 
Realm; for Orome had given him to Celegorm long ago in Valinor, and there he 
had followed the horn of his master, before evil came. Huan followed Celegorm 
into exile, and was faithful; and thus he too came under the doom of woe set 
upon the Noldor, and it was decreed that he should meet death, but not until he 
encountered the mightiest wolf that would ever walk the world. 

Huan it was that found Luthien flying like a shadow surprised by the daylight 
under the trees, when Celegorm and Curufin rested a while near to the western 
eaves of Doriath; for nothing could escape the sight and scent of Huan, nor could 
any enchantment stay him, and he slept not, neither by night nor day. He brought 
her to Celegorm, and Luthien, learning that he was a prince of the Noldor and a 
foe of Morgoth, was glad; and she declared herself, casting aside her cloak. So 
great was her sudden beauty revealed beneath the sun that Celegorm became 
enamoured of her; but he spoke her fair, and promised that she would find help 
in her need, if she returned with him now to Nargothrond. By no sign did he 
reveal that he knew already of Beren and the quest, of which she told, nor that it 
was a matter which touched him near. 

Thus they broke off the hunt and returned to Nargothrond, and Luthien was 
betrayed; for they held her fast, and took away her cloak, and she was not 
permitted to pass the gates or to speak with any save the brothers, Celegorm and 
Curufin. For now, believing that Beren and Felagund were prisoners beyond 
hope of aid, they purposed to let the King perish, and to keep Luthien, and force 
Thingol to give her hand to Celegorm. Thus they would advance their power, 
and become the mightiest of the princes of the Noldor. And they did not purpose 
to seek the Silmarils by craft or war, or to suffer any others to do so, until they 
had all the might of the Elf-kingdoms under their hands. Orodreth had no power 
to withstand them, for they swayed the hearts of the people of Nargothrond; and 



Celegorm sent messengers to Thingol urging his suit. 

But Huan the hound was true of heart, and the love of Luthien had fallen upon 
him in the first hour of their meeting; and he grieved at her captivity. Therefore 
he came often to her chamber; and at night he lay before her door, for he felt that 
evil had come to Nargothrond. Luthien spoke often to Huan in her loneliness, 
telling of Beren, who was the friend of all birds and beasts that did not serve 
Morgoth; and Huan understood all that was said. For he comprehended the 
speech of all things with voice; but it was permitted to him thrice only ere his 
death to speak with words. 

Now Huan devised a plan for the aid of Luthien; and coming at a time of night 
he brought her cloak, and for the first time he spoke, giving her counsel. Then he 
led her by secret ways out of Nargothrond, and they fled north together; and he 
humbled his pride and suffered her to ride upon him in the fashion of a steed, 
even as the Ores did at times upon great wolves. Thus they made great speed, for 
Huan was swift and tireless. 









In the pits of Sauron Beren and Felagund lay, and all their companions were 
now dead; but Sauron purposed to keep Felagund to the last, for he perceived 
that he was a Noldo of great might and wisdom, and he deemed that in him lay 
the secret of their errand. But when the wolf came for Beren, Felagund put forth 
all his power, and burst his bonds; and he wrestled with the werewolf, and slew 
it with his hands and teeth; yet he himself was wounded to the death. Then he 
spoke to Beren, saying: ‘I go now to my long rest in the timeless halls beyond 
the seas and the Mountains of Aman. It will be long ere I am seen among the 
Noldor again; and it may be that we shall not meet a second time in death or life, 
for the fates of our kindreds are apart. Farewell!’ He died then in the dark, in Tol- 
in-Gaurhoth, whose great tower he himself had built. Thus King Finrod 
Felagund, fairest and most beloved of the house of Finwe, redeemed his oath; 
but Beren mourned beside him in despair. 

In that hour Luthien came, and standing upon the bridge that led to Sauron’s 
isle she sang a song that no walls of stone could hinder. Beren heard, and he 
thought that he dreamed; for the stars shone above him, and in the trees 
nightingales were singing. And in answer he sang a song of challenge that he 
had made in praise of the Seven Stars, the Sickle of the Valar that Varda hung 
above the North as a sign for the fall of Morgoth. Then all strength left him and 
he fell down into darkness. 

But Luthien heard his answering voice, and she sang then a song of greater 
power. The wolves howled, and the isle trembled. Sauron stood in the high 
tower, wrapped in his black thought; but he smiled hearing her voice, for he 
knew that it was the daughter of Melian. The fame of the beauty of Luthien and 
the wonder of her song had long gone forth from Doriath; and he thought to 
make her captive and hand her over to the power of Morgoth, for his reward 
would be great. 

Therefore he sent a wolf to the bridge. But Huan slew it silently. Still Sauron 
sent others one by one; and one by one Huan took them by the throat and slew 
them. Then Sauron sent Draugluin, a dread beast, old in evil, lord and sire of the 
werewolves of Angband. His might was great; and the battle of Huan and 
Draugluin was long and fierce. Yet at length Draugluin escaped, and fleeing back 
into the tower he died before Sauron’s feet; and as he died he told his master: 
‘Huan is there!’ Now Sauron knew well, as did all in that land, the fate that was 
decreed for the hound of Valinor, and it came into his thought that he himself 
would accomplish it. Therefore he took upon himself the form of a werewolf, 



and made himself the mightiest that had yet walked the world; and he came forth 
to win the passage of the bridge. 

So great was the horror of his approach that Huan leaped aside. Then Sauron 
sprang upon Luthien; and she swooned before the menace of the fell spirit in his 
eyes and the foul vapour of his breath. But even as he came, falling she cast a 
fold of her dark cloak before his eyes; and he stumbled, for a fleeting drowsiness 
came upon him. Then Huan sprang. There befell the battle of Huan and Wolf- 
Sauron, and the howls and baying echoed in the hills, and the watchers on the 
walls of Ered Wethrin across the valley heard it afar and were dismayed. 

But no wizardry nor spell, neither fang nor venom, nor devil’s art nor beast- 
strength, could overthrow Huan of Valinor; and he took his foe by the throat and 
pinned him down. Then Sauron shifted shape, from wolf to serpent, and from 
monster to his own accustomed form; but he could not elude the grip of Huan 
without forsaking his body utterly. Ere his foul spirit left its dark house, Luthien 
came to him, and said that he should be stripped of his raiment of flesh, and his 
ghost be sent quaking back to Morgoth; and she said: There everlastingly thy 
naked self shall endure the torment of his scorn, pierced by his eyes, unless thou 
yield to me the mastery of thy tower.’ 

Then Sauron yielded himself, and Luthien took the mastery of the isle and all 
that was there; and Huan released him. And immediately he took the form of a 
vampire, great as a dark cloud across the moon, and he fled, dripping blood from 
his throat upon the trees, and came to Taur-nu-Fuin, and dwelt there, filling it 
with horror. 

Then Luthien stood upon the bridge, and declared her power: and the spell 
was loosed that bound stone to stone, and the gates were thrown down, and the 
walls opened, and the pits laid bare; and many thralls and captives came forth in 
wonder and dismay, shielding their eyes against the pale moonlight, for they had 
lain long in the darkness of Sauron. But Beren came not. Therefore Huan and 
Luthien sought him in the isle; and Luthien found him mourning by Felagund. 
So deep was his anguish that he lay still, and did not hear her feet. Then thinking 
him already dead she put her arms about him and fell into a dark forgetfulness. 
But Beren coming back to the light out of the pits of despair lifted her up, and 
they looked again upon one another; and the day rising over the dark hills shone 
upon them. 

They buried the body of Felagund upon the hill-top of his own isle, and it was 
clean again; and the green grave of Finrod Finarfin’s son, fairest of all the 
princes of the Elves, remained inviolate, until the land was changed and broken, 
and foundered under destroying seas. But Finrod walks with Finarfin his father 
beneath the trees in Eldamar. 














Now Beren and Luthien Tinuviel went free again and together walked through 
the woods renewing for a time their joy; and though winter came it hurt them 
not, for flowers lingered where Luthien went, and the birds sang beneath the 
snowclad hills. But Huan being faithful went back to Celegorm his master; yet 
their love was less than before. 

There was tumult in Nargothrond. For thither now returned many Elves that 
had been prisoners in the isle of Sauron; and a clamour arose that no words of 
Celegorm could still. They lamented bitterly the fall of Felagund their king, 
saying that a maiden had dared that which the sons of Feanor had not dared to 
do; but many perceived that it was treachery rather than fear that had guided 
Celegorm and Curufin. Therefore the hearts of the people of Nargothrond were 
released from their dominion, and turned again to the house of Finarfin; and they 
obeyed Orodreth. But he would not suffer them to slay the brothers, as some 
desired, for the spilling of kindred blood by kin would bind the curse of Mandos 
more closely upon them all. Yet neither bread nor rest would he grant to 
Celegorm and Curufin within his realm, and he swore that there should be little 
love between Nargothrond and the sons of Feanor thereafter. 

'Let it be so!’ said Celegorm, and there was a light of menace in his eyes; but 
Curufin smiled. Then they took horse and rode away like fire, to find if they 
might their kindred in the east. But none would go with them, not even those that 
were of their own people; for all perceived that the curse lay heavily upon the 
brothers, and that evil followed them. In that time Celebrimbor the son of 
Curufin repudiated the deeds of his father, and remained in Nargothrond; yet 
Huan followed still the horse of Celegorm his master. 

Northward they rode, for they intended in their haste to pass through Dimbar, 
and along the north marches of Doriath, seeking the swiftest road to Himring, 
where Maedhros their brother dwelt; and still they might hope with speed to 
traverse it, since it lay close to Doriath’s borders, shunning Nan Dungortheb and 
the distant menace of the Mountains of Terror. 

Now it is told that Beren and Luthien came in their wandering into the Forest 
of Brethil, and drew near at last to the borders of Doriath. Then Beren took 
thought of his vow; and against his heart he resolved, when Luthien was come 
again within the safety of her own land, to set forth once more. But she was not 
willing to be parted from him again, saying: 'You must choose, Beren, between 
these two: to relinquish the quest and your oath and seek a life of wandering 
upon the face of the earth; or to hold to your word and challenge the power of 



darkness upon its throne. But on either road I shall go with you, and our doom 
shall be alike . 5 

Even as they spoke together of these things, walking without heed of aught 
else, Celegorm and Curufin rode up, hastening through the forest; and the 
brothers espied them and knew them from afar. Then Celegorm turned his horse, 
and spurred it upon Beren, purposing to ride him down; but Curufin swerving 
stooped and lifted Luthien to his saddle, for he was a strong and cunning 
horseman. Then Beren sprang from before Celegorm full upon the speeding 
horse of Curufin that had passed him; and the Leap of Beren is renowned among 
Men and Elves. He took Curufin by the throat from behind, and hurled him 
backward, and they fell to the ground together. The horse reared and fell, but 
Luthien was flung aside, and lay upon the grass. 

Then Beren throttled Curufin; but death was near him, for Celegorm rode 
upon him with a spear. In that hour Huan forsook the service of Celegorm, and 
sprang upon him, so that his horse swerved aside, and would not approach Beren 
because of the terror of the great hound. Celegorm cursed both hound and horse, 
but Huan was unmoved. Then Luthien rising forbade the slaying of Curufin; but 
Beren despoiled him of his gear and weapons, and took his knife, Angrist. That 
knife was made by Telchar of Nogrod, and hung sheathless by his side; iron it 
would cleave as if it were green wood. Then Beren lifting Curufin flung him 
from him, and bade him walk now back to his noble kinsfolk, who might teach 
him to turn his valour to worthier use. ‘Your horse,’ he said, ‘I keep for the 
service of Luthien, and it may be accounted happy to be free of such a master.’ 

Then Curufin cursed Beren under cloud and sky. ‘Go hence,’ he said, ‘unto a 
swift and bitter death.’ Celegorm took him beside him on his horse, and the 
brothers made then as if to ride away; and Beren turned away and took no heed 
of their words. But Curufin, being filled with shame and malice, took the bow of 
Celegorm and shot back as they went; and the arrow was aimed at Luthien. Huan 
leaping caught it in his mouth; but Curufin shot again, and Beren sprang before 
Luthien, and the dart smote him in the breast. 

It is told that Huan pursued the sons of Leanor, and they fled in fear; and 
returning he brought to Luthien a herb out of the forest. With that leaf she 
staunched Beren’s wound, and by her arts and by her love she healed him; and 
thus at last they returned to Doriath. There Beren, being torn between his oath 
and his love, and knowing Luthien to be now safe, arose one morning before the 
sun, and committed her to the care of Huan; then in great anguish he departed 
while she yet slept upon the grass. 

He rode northward again with all speed to the Pass of Sirion, and coming to 
the skirts of Taur-nu-Luin he looked out across the waste of Anfauglith and saw 



afar the peaks of Thangorodrim. There he dismissed the horse of Curufin, and 
bade it leave now dread and servitude and run free upon the green grass in the 
lands of Sirion. Then being now alone and upon the threshold of the final peril 
he made the Song of Parting, in praise of Luthien and the lights of heaven; for he 
believed that he must now say farewell to both love and light. Of that song these 
words were part: 


Farewell sweet earth and northern sky, 
for ever blest, since here did lie 
and here with lissom limbs did run 
beneath the Moon, beneath the Sun, 
Luthien Tinuviel 

more fair than mortal tongue can tell. 

Though all to ruin fell the world 

and were dissolved and backward hurled 

unmade into the old abyss, 

yet were its making good, for this — 

the dusk, the dawn, the earth, the sea — 

that Luthien for a time should be. 


And he sang aloud, caring not what ear should overhear him, for he was 
desperate and looked for no escape. 

But Luthien heard his song, and she sang in answer, as she came through the 
woods unlooked for. For Huan, consenting once more to be her steed, had borne 
her swiftly hard upon Beren’s trail. Long he had pondered in his heart what 
counsel he could devise for the lightening of the peril of these two whom he 
loved. He turned aside therefore at Sauron’s isle, as they ran northward again, 
and he took thence the ghastly wolf-hame of Draugluin, and the bat-fell of 
Thuringwethil. She was the messenger of Sauron, and was wont to fly in 
vampire’s form to Angband; and her great fingered wings were barbed at each 
joint’s end with an iron claw. Clad in these dreadful garments Huan and Luthien 
ran through Taur-nu-Fuin, and all things fled before them. 

Beren seeing their approach was dismayed; and he wondered, for he had heard 
the voice of Tinuviel, and he thought it now a phantom for his ensnaring. But 
they halted and cast aside their disguise, and Luthien ran towards him. Thus 
Beren and Luthien met again between the desert and the wood. For a while he 
was silent, and was glad; but after a space he strove once more to dissuade 



Luthien from her journey. 

Thrice now I curse my oath to Thingol,’ he said, ‘and I would that he had 
slain me in Menegroth, rather than I should bring you under the shadow of 
Morgoth.’ 

Then for the second time Huan spoke with words; and he counselled Beren, 
saying: ‘From the shadow of death you can no longer save Luthien, for by her 
love she is now subject to it. You can turn from your fate and lead her into exile, 
seeking peace in vain while your life lasts. But if you will not deny your doom, 
then either Luthien, being forsaken, must assuredly die alone, or she must with 
you challenge the fate that lies before you—hopeless, yet not certain. Further 
counsel I cannot give, nor may I go further on your road. But my heart forebodes 
that what you find at the Gate I shall myself see. All else is dark to me; yet it 
may be that our three paths lead back to Doriath, and we may meet before the 
end.’ 

Then Beren perceived that Luthien could not be divided from the doom that 
lay upon them both, and he sought no longer to dissuade her. By the counsel of 
Huan and the arts of Luthien he was arrayed now in the hame of Draugluin, and 
she in the winged fell of Thuringwethil. Beren became in all things like a 
werewolf to look upon, save that in his eyes there shone a spirit grim indeed but 
clean; and horror was in his glance as he saw upon his flank a bat-like creature 
clinging with creased wings. Then howling under the moon he leaped down the 
hill, and the bat wheeled and flittered above him. 























They passed through all perils, until they came with the dust of their long and 
weary road upon them to the drear dale that lay before the Gate of Angband. 
Black chasms opened beside the road, whence forms as of writhing serpents 
issued. On either hand the cliffs stood as embattled walls, and upon them sat 
carrion fowl crying with fell voices. Before them was the impregnable Gate, an 
arch wide and dark at the foot of the mountain; above it reared a thousand feet of 
precipice. 

There dismay took them, for at the gate was a guard of whom no tidings had 
yet gone forth. Rumour of he knew not what designs abroad among the princes 
of the Elves had come to Morgoth, and ever down the aisles of the forest was 
heard the baying of Huan, the great hound of war, whom long ago the Valar 
unleashed. Then Morgoth recalled the doom of Huan, and he chose one from 
among the whelps of the race of Draugluin; and he fed him with his own hand 
upon living flesh, and put his power upon him. Swiftly the wolf grew, until he 
could creep into no den, but lay huge and hungry before the feet of Morgoth. 
There the fire and anguish of hell entered into him, and he became filled with a 
devouring spirit, tormented, terrible, and strong. Carcharoth, the Red Maw, he is 
named in the tales of those days, and Anfauglir, the Jaws of Thirst. And Morgoth 
set him to lie unsleeping before the doors of Angband, lest Huan come. 

Now Carcharoth espied them from afar, and he was filled with doubt; for news 
had long been brought to Angband that Draugluin was dead. Therefore when 
they approached he denied them entry, and bade them stand; and he drew near 
with menace, scenting something strange in the air about them. But suddenly 
some power, descended from of old from divine race, possessed Luthien, and 
casting back her foul raiment she stood forth, small before the might of 
Carcharoth, but radiant and terrible. Lifting up her hand she commanded him to 
sleep, saying: £ 0 woe-begotten spirit, fall now into dark oblivion, and forget for 
a while the dreadful doom of life.’ And Carcharoth was felled, as though 
lightning had smitten him. 

Then Beren and Luthien went through the Gate, and down the labyrinthine 
stairs; and together wrought the greatest deed that has been dared by Elves or 
Men. Lor they came to the seat of Morgoth in his nethermost hall, that was 
upheld by horror, lit by fire, and filled with weapons of death and torment. There 
Beren slunk in wolf’s form beneath his throne; but Luthien was stripped of her 
disguise by the will of Morgoth, and he bent his gaze upon her. She was not 
daunted by his eyes; and she named her own name, and offered her service to 



sing before him, after the manner of a minstrel. Then Morgoth looking upon her 
beauty conceived in his thought an evil lust, and a design more dark than any 
that had yet come into his heart since he fled from Valinor. Thus he was beguiled 
by his own malice, for he watched her, leaving her free for a while, and taking 
secret pleasure in his thought. Then suddenly she eluded his sight, and out of the 
shadows began a song of such surpassing loveliness, and of such blinding power, 
that he listened perforce; and a blindness came upon him, as his eyes roamed to 
and fro, seeking her. 

All his court were cast down in slumber, and all the fires faded and were 
quenched; but the Silmarils in the crown on Morgoth’s head blazed forth 
suddenly with a radiance of white flame; and the burden of that crown and of the 
jewels bowed down his head, as though the world were set upon it, laden with a 
weight of care, of fear, and of desire, that even the will of Morgoth could not 
support. Then Luthien catching up her winged robe sprang into the air, and her 
voice came dropping down like rain into pools, profound and dark. She cast her 
cloak before his eyes, and set upon him a dream, dark as the Outer Void where 
once he walked alone. Suddenly he fell, as a hill sliding in avalanche, and hurled 
like thunder from his throne lay prone upon the floors of hell. The iron crown 
rolled echoing from his head. All things were still. 

As a dead beast Beren lay upon the ground; but Luthien touching him with her 
hand aroused him, and he cast aside the wolf-hame. Then he drew forth the knife 
Angrist; and from the iron claws that held it he cut a Silmaril. 

As he closed it in his hand, the radiance welled through his living flesh, and 
his hand became as a shining lamp; but the jewel suffered his touch and hurt him 
not. It came then into Beren’s mind that he would go beyond his vow, and bear 
out of Angband all three of the Jewels of Feanor; but such was not the doom of 
the Silmarils. The knife Angrist snapped, and a shard of the blade flying smote 
the cheek of Morgoth. He groaned and stirred, and all the host of Angband 
moved in sleep. 

Then terror fell upon Beren and Luthien, and they fled, heedless and without 
disguise, desiring only to see the light once more. They were neither hindered 
nor pursued, but the Gate was held against their going out; for Carcharoth had 
arisen from sleep, and stood now in wrath upon the threshold of Angband. 
Before they were aware of him, he saw them, and sprang upon them as they ran. 

Luthien was spent, and she had not time nor strength to quell the wolf. But 
Beren strode forth before her, and in his right hand he held aloft the Silmaril. 
Carcharoth halted, and for a moment was afraid. ‘Get you gone, and fly!’ cried 
Beren; ‘for here is a fire that shall consume you, and all evil things.’ And he 
thrust the Silmaril before the eyes of the wolf. 



But Carcharoth looked upon that holy jewel and was not daunted, and the 
devouring spirit within him awoke to sudden fire; and gaping he took suddenly 
the hand within his jaws, and he bit it off at the wrist. Then swiftly all his 
inwards were filled with a flame of anguish, and the Silmaril seared his accursed 
flesh. Howling he fled before them, and the walls of the valley of the Gate 
echoed with the clamour of his torment. So terrible did he become in his 
madness that all the creatures of Morgoth that abode in that valley, or were upon 
any of the roads that led thither, fled far away; for he slew all living things that 
stood in his path, and burst from the North with ruin upon the world. Of all the 
terrors that came ever into Beleriand ere Angband’s fall the madness of 
Carcharoth was the most dreadful; for the power of the Silmaril was hidden 
within him. 

Now Beren lay in a swoon within the perilous Gate, and death drew nigh him, 
for there was venom on the fangs of the wolf. Luthien with her lips drew out the 
venom, and she put forth her failing power to staunch the hideous wound. But 
behind her in the depths of Angband the rumour grew of great wrath aroused. 
The hosts of Morgoth were awakened. 

Thus the quest of the Silmaril was like to have ended in ruin and despair; but 
in that hour above the wall of the valley three mighty birds appeared, flying 
northward with wings swifter than the wind. Among all birds and beasts the 
wandering and need of Beren had been noised, and Huan himself had bidden all 
things watch, that they might bring him aid. High above the realm of Morgoth 
Thorondor and his vassals soared, and seeing now the madness of the Wolf and 
Beren’s fall they came swiftly down, even as the powers of Angband were 
released from the toils of sleep. 

Then they lifted up Luthien and Beren from the earth, and bore them aloft into 
the clouds. Below them suddenly thunder rolled, lightnings leaped upward, and 
the mountains quaked. Fire and smoke belched forth from Thangorodrim, and 
flaming bolts were hurled far abroad, falling ruinous upon the lands; and the 
Noldor in Hithlum trembled. But Thorondor took his way far above the earth, 
seeking the high roads of heaven, where the sun daylong shines unveiled and the 
moon walks amid the cloudless stars. Thus they passed swiftly over Dor-nu- 
Fauglith, and over Taur-nu-Fuin, and came above the hidden valley of 
Tumladen. No cloud nor mist lay there, and looking down Luthien saw far 
below, as a white light starting from a green jewel, the radiance of Gondolin the 
fair where Turgon dwelt. But she wept, for she thought that Beren would surely 
die; he spoke no word, nor opened his eyes, and knew thereafter nothing of his 
flight. And at the last the eagles set them down upon the borders of Doriath; and 
they were come to that same dell whence Beren had stolen in despair and left 



Luthien asleep. 

There the eagles laid her at Beren’s side and returned to the peaks of 
Crissaegrim and their high eyries; but Huan came to her, and together they 
tended Beren, even as before when she healed him of the wound that Curufin 
gave to him. But this wound was fell and poisonous. Long Beren lay, and his 
spirit wandered upon the dark borders of death, knowing ever an anguish that 
pursued him from dream to dream. Then suddenly, when her hope was almost 
spent, he woke again, and looked up, seeing leaves against the sky; and he heard 
beneath the leaves singing soft and slow beside him Luthien Tinuviel. And it 
was spring again. 

Thereafter Beren was named Erchamion, which is the One-handed; and 
suffering was graven in his face. But at last he was drawn back to life by the love 
of Luthien, and he arose, and together they walked in the woods once more. And 
they did not hasten from that place, for it seemed fair to them. Luthien indeed 
was willing to wander in the wild without returning, forgetting house and people 
and all the glory of the Elf-kingdoms, and for a time Beren was content; but he 
could not for long forget his oath to return to Menegroth, nor would he withhold 
Luthien from Thingol for ever. For he held by the law of Men, deeming it 
perilous to set at naught the will of the father, save at the last need; and it seemed 
also to him unfit that one so royal and fair as Luthien should live always in the 
woods, as the rude hunters among Men, without home or honour or the fair 
things which are the delight of the queens of the Eldalie. Therefore after a while 
he persuaded her, and their footsteps forsook the houseless lands; and he passed 
into Doriath, leading Luthien home. So their doom willed it. 

Upon Doriath evil days had fallen. Grief and silence had come upon all its 
people when Luthien was lost. Long they had sought for her in vain. And it is 
told that in that time Daeron the minstrel of Thingol strayed from the land, and 
was seen no more. He it was that made music for the dance and song of Luthien, 
before Beren came to Doriath; and he had loved her, and set all his thought of 
her in his music. He became the greatest of all the minstrels of the Elves east of 
the Sea, named even before Maglor son of Feanor. But seeking for Luthien in 
despair he wandered upon strange paths, and passing over the mountains he 
came into the East of Middle-earth, where for many ages he made lament beside 
dark waters for Luthien, daughter of Thingol, most beautiful of all living things. 

In that time Thingol turned to Melian; but now she withheld her counsel from 
him, saying that the doom that he had devised must work to its appointed end, 
and that he must wait now upon time. But Thingol learned that Luthien had 
journeyed far from Doriath, for messages came secretly from Celegorm, as has 
been told, saying that Felagund was dead, and Beren was dead, but Luthien was 



in Nargothrond, and that Celegorm would wed her. Then Thingol was wrathful, 
and he sent forth spies, thinking to make war upon Nargothrond; and thus he 
learned that Luthien was again fled, and that Celegorm and Curufin were driven 
from Nargothrond. Then his counsel was in doubt, for he had not the strength to 
assail the seven sons of Feanor; but he sent messengers to Himring to summon 
their aid in seeking for Luthien, since Celegorm had not sent her to the house of 
her father, nor had he kept her safely. 

But in the north of his realm his messengers met with a peril sudden and 
unlooked for: the onslaught of Carcharoth, the Wolf of Angband. In his madness 
he had run ravening from the north, and passing at length over Taur-nu-Fuin 
upon its eastern side he came down from the sources of Esgalduin like a 
destroying fire. Nothing hindered him, and the might of Melian upon the borders 
of the land stayed him not; for fate drove him, and the power of the Silmaril that 
he bore to his torment. Thus he burst into the inviolate woods of Doriath, and all 
fled away in fear. Alone of the messengers Mablung, chief captain of the King, 
escaped, and he brought the dread tidings to Thingol. 

Even in that dark hour Beren and Luthien returned, hastening from the west, 
and the news of their coming went before them like a sound of music borne by 
the wind into dark houses where men sit sorrowful. They came at last to the 
gates of Menegroth, and a great host followed them. Then Beren led Luthien 
before the throne of Thingol her father; and he looked in wonder upon Beren, 
whom he had thought dead; but he loved him not, because of the woes that he 
had brought upon Doriath. But Beren knelt before him, and said: T return 
according to my word. I am come now to claim my own.’ 

And Thingol answered: ‘What of your quest, and of your vow?’ 

But Beren said: ‘It is fulfilled. Even now a Silmaril is in my hand.’ 

Then Thingol said: ‘Show it to me!’ 

And Beren put forth his left hand, slowly opening its fingers; but it was empty. 
Then he held up his right arm; and from that hour he named himself Camlost, the 
Empty-handed. 

Then Thingol’s mood was softened; and Beren sat before his throne upon the 
left, and Luthien upon the right, and they told all the tale of the Quest, while all 
there listened and were filled with amazement. And it seemed to Thingol that 
this Man was unlike all other mortal Men, and among the great in Arda, and the 
love of Luthien a thing new and strange; and he perceived that their doom might 
not be withstood by any power of the world. Therefore at the last he yielded his 
will, and Beren took the hand of Luthien before the throne of her father. 

But now a shadow fell upon the joy of Doriath at the return of Luthien the 
fair; for learning of the cause of the madness of Carcharoth the people grew the 



more afraid, perceiving that his danger was fraught with dreadful power because 
of the holy jewel, and hardly might be overthrown. And Beren, hearing of the 
onslaught of the Wolf, understood that the Quest was not yet fulfilled. 

Therefore, since daily Carcharoth drew nearer to Menegroth, they prepared 
the Hunting of the Wolf; of all pursuits of beasts whereof tales tell the most 
perilous. To that chase went Huan the Hound of Valinor, and Mablung of the 
Heavy Hand, and Beleg Strongbow, and Beren Erchamion, and Thingol King of 
Doriath. They rode forth in the morning and passed over the River Esgalduin; 
but Luthien remained behind at the gates of Menegroth. A dark shadow fell upon 
her and it seemed to her that the sun had sickened and turned black. 

The hunters turned east and north, and following the course of the river they 
came at last upon Carcharoth the Wolf in a dark valley, down the northern side 
whereof Esgalduin fell in a torrent over steep falls. At the foot of the falls 
Carcharoth drank to ease his consuming thirst, and he howled, and thus they 
were aware of him. But he, espying their approach, rushed not suddenly to attack 
them. It may be that the devil’s cunning of his heart awoke, being for a moment 
eased of his pain by the sweet waters of Esgalduin; and even as they rode 
towards him he slunk aside into a deep brake, and there lay hid. But they set a 
guard about all that place, and waited, and the shadows grew long in the forest. 

Beren stood beside Thingol, and suddenly they were aware that Huan had left 
their side. Then a great baying awoke in the thicket; for Huan becoming 
impatient and desiring to look upon this wolf had gone in alone to dislodge him. 
But Carcharoth avoided him, and bursting from the thorns leaped suddenly upon 
Thingol. Swiftly Beren strode before him with a spear, but Carcharoth swept it 
aside and felled him, biting at his breast. In that moment Huan leaped from the 
thicket upon the back of the Wolf, and they fell together fighting bitterly; and no 
battle of wolf and hound has been like to it, for in the baying of Huan was heard 
the voice of the horns of Orome and the wrath of the Valar, but in the howls of 
Carcharoth was the hate of Morgoth and malice crueller than teeth of steel; and 
the rocks were rent by their clamour and fell from on high and choked the falls 
of Esgalduin. There they fought to the death; but Thingol gave no heed, for he 
knelt by Beren, seeing that he was sorely hurt. 

Huan in that hour slew Carcharoth; but there in the woven woods of Doriath 
his own doom long spoken was fulfilled, and he was wounded mortally, and the 
venom of Morgoth entered into him. Then he came, and falling beside Beren 
spoke for the third time with words; and he bade Beren farewell before he died. 
Beren spoke not, but laid his hand upon the head of the hound, and so they 
parted. 

Mablung and Beleg came hastening to the King’s aid, but when they looked 



upon what was done they cast aside their spears and wept. Then Mablung took a 
knife and ripped up the belly of the Wolf; and within he was wellnigh all 
consumed as with a fire, but the hand of Beren that held the jewel was yet 
incorrupt. But when Mablung reached forth to touch it, the hand was no more, 
and the Silmaril lay there unveiled, and the light of it filled the shadows of the 
forest all about them. Then quickly and in fear Mablung took it and set it in 
Beren’s living hand; and Beren was aroused by the touch of the Silmaril, and 
held it aloft, and bade Thingol receive it. ‘Now is the Quest achieved/ he said, 
‘and my doom full-wrought’; and he spoke no more. 

They bore back Beren Camlost son of Barahir upon a bier of branches with 
Huan the wolfhound at his side; and night fell ere they returned to Menegroth. 
At the feet of Hirilorn the great beech Luthien met them walking slow, and some 
bore torches beside the bier. There she set her arms about Beren, and kissed him, 
bidding him await her beyond the Western Sea; and he looked upon her eyes ere 
the spirit left him. But the starlight was quenched and darkness had fallen even 
upon Luthien Tinuviel. Thus ended the Quest of the Silmaril; but the Lay of 
Leithian, Release from Bondage, does not end. 

For the spirit of Beren at her bidding tarried in the halls of Mandos, unwilling 
to leave the world, until Luthien came to say her last farewell upon the dim 
shores of the Outer Sea, whence Men that die set out never to return. But the 
spirit of Luthien fell down into darkness, and at the last it fled, and her body lay 
like a flower that is suddenly cut off and lies for a while unwithered on the grass. 

Then a winter, as it were the hoar age of mortal Men, fell upon Thingol. But 
Luthien came to the halls of Mandos, where are the appointed places of the 
Eldalie, beyond the mansions of the West upon the confines of the world. There 
those that wait sit in the shadow of their thought. But her beauty was more than 
their beauty, and her sorrow deeper than their sorrows; and she knelt before 
Mandos and sang to him. 

The song of Luthien before Mandos was the song most fair that ever in words 
was woven, and the song most sorrowful that ever the world shall hear. 
Unchanged, imperishable, it is sung still in Valinor beyond the hearing of the 
world, and listening the Valar are grieved. For Luthien wove two themes of 
words, of the sorrow of the Eldar and the grief of Men, of the Two Kindreds that 
were made by Iluvatar to dwell in Arda, the Kingdom of Earth amid the 
innumerable stars. And as she knelt before him her tears fell upon his feet like 
rain upon the stones; and Mandos was moved to pity, who never before was so 
moved, nor has been since. 

Therefore he summoned Beren, and even as Luthien had spoken in the hour of 
his death they met again beyond the Western Sea. But Mandos had no power to 



withhold the spirits of Men that were dead within the confines of the world, after 
their time of waiting; nor could he change the fates of the Children of Iluvatar. 
He went therefore to Manwe, Lord of the Valar, who governed the world under 
the hand of Iluvatar; and Manwe sought counsel in his inmost thought, where the 
will of Iluvatar was revealed. 

These were the choices that he gave to Luthien. Because of her labours and 
her sorrow, she should be released from Mandos, and go to Valimar, there to 
dwell until the world’s end among the Valar, forgetting all griefs that her life had 
known. Thither Beren could not come. For it was not permitted to the Valar to 
withhold Death from him, which is the gift of Iluvatar to Men. But the other 
choice was this: that she might return to Middle-earth, and take with her Beren, 
there to dwell again, but without certitude of life or joy. Then she would become 
mortal, and subject to a second death, even as he; and ere long she would leave 
the world for ever, and her beauty become only a memory in song. 

This doom she chose, forsaking the Blessed Realm, and putting aside all claim 
to kinship with those that dwell there; that thus whatever grief might lie in wait, 
the fates of Beren and Luthien might be joined, and their paths lead together 
beyond the confines of the world. So it was that alone of the Eldalie she has died 
indeed, and left the world long ago. Yet in her choice the Two Kindreds have 
been joined; and she is the forerunner of many in whom the Eldar see yet, 
though all the world is changed, the likeness of Luthien the beloved, whom they 
have lost. 










CHAPTER 20 



OF THE FIFTH BATTLE: NIRNAETH ARNQEDIAD 


It is said that Beren and Luthien returned to the northern lands of Middle-earth, 
and dwelt together for a time as living man and woman; and they took up again 
their mortal form in Doriath. Those that saw them were both glad and fearful; 
and Luthien went to Menegroth and healed the winter of Thingol with the touch 
of her hand. But Melian looked in her eyes and read the doom that was written 
there, and turned away; for she knew that a parting beyond the end of the world 
had come between them, and no grief of loss has been heavier than the grief of 
Melian the Maia in that hour. Then Beren and Luthien went forth alone, fearing 
neither thirst nor hunger; and they passed beyond the River Gelion into 
Ossiriand, and dwelt there in Tol Galen the green isle, in the midst of Adurant, 
until all tidings of them ceased. The Eldar afterwards called that country Dor 
Firn-i-Guinar, the Land of the Dead that Live; and there was born Dior Aranel 
the beautiful, who was after known as Dior Eluchil, which is Thingol’s Heir. No 
mortal man spoke ever again with Beren son of Barahir; and none saw Beren or 
Luthien leave the world, or marked where at last their bodies lay. 


In those days Maedhros son of Feanor lifted up his heart, perceiving that 
Morgoth was not unassailable; for the deeds of Beren and Luthien were sung in 
many songs throughout Beleriand. Yet Morgoth would destroy them all, one by 
one, if they could not again unite, and make new league and common council; 
and he began those counsels for the raising of the fortunes of the Eldar that are 
called the Union of Maedhros. 

Yet the oath of Feanor and the evil deeds that it had wrought did injury to the 
design of Maedhros, and he had less aid than should have been. Orodreth would 
not march forth at the word of any son of Feanor, because of the deeds of 
Celegorm and Curufin; and the Elves of Nargothrond trusted still to defend their 
hidden stronghold by secrecy and stealth. Thence came only a small company, 
following Gwindor son of Guilin, a very valiant prince; and against the will of 
Orodreth he went to the northern war, because he grieved for the loss of Gelmir 
his brother in the Dagor Bragollach. They took the badge of the house of 
Fingolfin, and marched beneath the banners of Fingon; and they came never 
back, save one. 

From Doriath came little help. For Maedhros and his brothers, being 
constrained by their oath, had before sent to Thingol and reminded him with 
haughty words of their claim, summoning him to yield the Silmaril, or become 



their enemy. Melian counselled him to surrender it; but the words of the sons of 
Feanor were proud and threatening, and Thin-gol was filled with anger, thinking 
of the anguish of Liithien and the blood of Beren whereby the jewel had been 
won, despite the malice of Celegorm and Curufin. And every day that he looked 
upon the Silmaril the more he desired to keep it for ever; for such was its power. 
Therefore he sent back the messengers with scornful words. Maedhros made no 
answer, for he had now begun to devise the league and union of the Elves; but 
Celegorm and Curufin vowed openly to slay Thingol and destroy his people, if 
they came victorious from war, and the jewel were not surrendered of free will. 
Then Thingol fortified the marches of his realm, and went not to war, nor any 
out of Doriath save Mablung and Beleg, who were unwilling to have no part in 
these great deeds. To them Thingol gave leave to go, so long as they served not 
the sons of Feanor; and they joined themselves to the host of Fingon. 

But Maedhros had the help of the Naugrim, both in armed force and in great 
store of weapons; and the smithies of Nogrod and Belegost were busy in those 
days. And he gathered together again all his brothers and all the people who 
would follow them; and the Men of Bor and Ulfang were marshalled and trained 
for war, and they summoned yet more of their kinsfolk out of the East. Moreover 
in the west Fingon, ever the friend of Maedhros, took counsel with Himring, and 
in Hithlum the Noldor and the Men of the house of Hador prepared for war. In 
the forest of Brethil Halmir, lord of the People of Haleth, gathered his men, and 
they whetted their axes; but Halmir died ere the war came, and Haldir his son 
ruled that people. And to Gondolin also the tidings came, to Turgon, the hidden 
king. 

But Maedhros made trial of his strength too soon, ere his plans were full- 
wrought; and though the Ores were driven out of all the northward regions of 
Beleriand, and even Dorthonion was freed for a while, Morgoth was warned of 
the uprising of the Eldar and the Elf-friends, and took counsel against them. 
Many spies and workers of treason he sent forth among them, as he was the 
better able now to do, for the faithless Men of his secret allegiance were yet deep 
in the secrets of the sons of Feanor. 

At length Maedhros, having gathered all the strength that he could of Elves 
and Men and Dwarves, resolved to assault Angband from east and west; and he 
purposed to march with banners displayed in open force over Anfauglith. But 
when he had drawn forth, as he hoped, the armies of Morgoth in answer, then 
Fingon should issue forth from the passes of Hithlum; and thus they thought to 
take the might of Morgoth as between anvil and hammer, and break it to pieces. 
And the signal for this was to be the firing of a great beacon in Dorthonion. 

On the appointed day, on the morning of Midsummer, the trumpets of the 



Eldar greeted the rising of the sun; and in the east was raised the standard of the 
sons of Feanor, and in the west the standard of Fingon, High King of the Noldor. 
Then Fingon looked out from the walls of Eithel Sirion, and his host was arrayed 
in the valleys and the woods upon the east of Ered Wethrin, well hid from the 
eyes of the Enemy; but he knew that it was very great. For there all the Noldor of 
Hithlum were assembled, together with Elves of the Falas and Gwindor’s 
company from Nargothrond, and he had great strength of Men: upon the right 
were the host of Dor-lomin and all the valour of Hurin and Huor his brother, and 
to them had come Haldir of Brethil with many men of the woods. 

Then Fingon looked towards Thangorodrim, and there was a dark cloud about 
it, and a black smoke went up; and he knew that the wrath of Morgoth was 
aroused, and that their challenge was accepted. A shadow of doubt fell upon 
Fingon’s heart; and he looked eastwards, seeking if he might see with elven- 
sight the dust of Anfauglith rising beneath the hosts of Maedhros. He knew not 
that Maedhros was hindered in his setting-forth by the guile of Uldor the 
accursed, who deceived him with false warnings of assault from Angband. 

But now a cry went up, passing up the wind from the south from vale to vale, 
and Elves and Men lifted their voices in wonder and joy. For unsummoned and 
unlooked for Turgon had opened the leaguer of Gondolin, and was come with an 
army ten thousand strong, with bright mail and long swords and spears like a 
forest. Then when Fingon heard afar the great trumpet of Turgon his brother, the 
shadow passed and his heart was uplifted, and he shouted aloud: ‘Utulie’n aure! 
Alya Eldalie ar Atanatari, utulie’n aure! The day has come! Behold, people of 
the Eldar and Fathers of Men, the day has come!’ And all those who heard his 
great voice echo in the hills answered crying: ‘Auta i lome! The night is 
passing!’ 

Now Morgoth, who knew much of what was done and designed by his 
enemies, chose his hour, and trusting in his treacherous servants to hold back 
Maedhros and prevent the union of his foes he sent a force seeming great (and 
yet but part of all that he had made ready) towards Hithlum; and they were clad 
all in dun raiment and showed no naked steel, and thus were already far over the 
sands of Anfauglith before their approach was seen. 

Then the hearts of the Noldor grew hot, and their captains wished to assail 
their foes upon the plain; but Hurin spoke against it, and bade them beware of 
the guile of Morgoth, whose strength was always greater than it seemed, and his 
purpose other than he revealed. And though the signal of the approach of 
Maedhros came not, and the host grew impatient, Hurin urged them still to await 
it, and to let the Ores break themselves in assault upon the hills. 

But the Captain of Morgoth in the west had been commanded to draw out 



Fingon swiftly from his hills by whatever means he could. He marched on 
therefore until the front of his battle was drawn up before the stream of Sirion, 
from the walls of the fortress of Eithel Sirion to the inflowing of Rivil at the Fen 
of Serech; and the outposts of Fingon could see the eyes of their enemies. But 
there was no answer to his challenge, and the taunts of the Ores faltered as they 
looked upon the silent walls and the hidden threat of the hills. Then the Captain 
of Morgoth sent out riders with tokens of parley, and they rode up before the 
outworks of the Barad Eithel. With them they brought Gelmir son of Guilin, that 
lord of Nargothrond whom they had captured in the Bragollach; and they had 
blinded him. Then the heralds of Angband showed him forth, crying: ‘We have 
many more such at home, but you must make haste if you would find them; for 
we shall deal with them all when we return even so. 5 And they hewed off 
Gelmir’s hands and feet, and his head last, within sight of the Elves, and left 
him. 

By ill chance, at that place in the outworks stood Gwindor of Nargothrond, the 
brother of Gelmir. Now his wrath was kindled to madness, and he leapt forth on 
horseback, and many riders with him; and they pursued the heralds and slew 
them, and drove on deep into the main host. And seeing this all the host of the 
Noldor was set on fire, and Fingon put on his white helm and sounded his 
trumpets, and all the host of Hithlum leapt forth from the hills in sudden 
onslaught. The light of the drawing of the swords of the Noldor was like a fire in 
a field of reeds; and so fell and swift was their onset that almost the designs of 
Morgoth went astray. Before the army that he sent westward could be 
strengthened it was swept away, and the banners of Fingon passed over 
Anfauglith and were raised before the walls of Angband. Ever in the forefront of 
that battle went Gwindor and the Elves of Nargothrond, and even now they 
could not be restrained; and they burst through the Gate and slew the guards 
upon the very stairs of Angband, and Morgoth trembled upon his deep throne, 
hearing them beat upon his doors. But they were trapped there, and all were slain 
save Gwindor only, whom they took alive; for Fingon could not come to their 
aid. By many secret doors in Thangorodrim Morgoth had let issue forth his main 
host that he held in waiting, and Fingon was beaten back with great loss from the 
walls. 

Then in the plain of Anfauglith, on the fourth day of the war, there began 
Nirnaeth Arnoediad, Unnumbered Tears, for no song or tale can contain all its 
grief. The host of Fingon retreated over the sands, and Haldir lord of the Haladin 
was slain in the rearguard; with him fell most of the Men of Brethil, and came 
never back to their woods. But on the fifth day as night fell, and they were still 
far from Ered Wethrin, the Ores surrounded the host of Hithlum, and they fought 



until day, pressed ever closer. In the morning came hope, when the horns of 
Turgon were heard as he marched up with the main host of Gondolin; for they 
had been stationed southward guarding the Pass of Sirion, and Turgon restrained 
most of his people from the rash onslaught. Now he hastened to the aid of his 
brother; and the Gondolindrim were strong and clad in mail, and their ranks 
shone like a river of steel in the sun. 

Now the phalanx of the guard of the King broke through the ranks of the Ores, 
and Turgon hewed his way to the side of his brother; and it is told that the 
meeting of Turgon with Hurin, who stood beside Fingon, was glad in the midst 
of battle. Then hope was renewed in the hearts of the Elves; and in that very 
time, at the third hour of morning, the trumpets of Maedhros were heard at last 
coming up from the east, and the banners of the sons of Feanor assailed the 
enemy in the rear. Some have said that even then the Eldar might have won the 
day, had all their hosts proved faithful; for the Ores wavered, and their onslaught 
was stayed, and already some were turning to flight. But even as the vanguard of 
Maedhros came upon the Ores, Morgoth loosed his last strength, and Angband 
was emptied. There came wolves, and wolfriders, and there came Balrogs, and 
dragons, and Glaurung father of dragons. The strength and terror of the Great 
Worm were now great indeed, and Elves and Men withered before him; and he 
came between the hosts of Maedhros and Fingon and swept them apart. 

Yet neither by wolf, nor by Balrog, nor by Dragon, would Morgoth have 
achieved his end, but for the treachery of Men. In this hour the plots of Ulfang 
were revealed. Many of the Easterlings turned and fled, their hearts being filled 
with lies and fear; but the sons of Ulfang went over suddenly to Morgoth and 
drove in upon the rear of the sons of Feanor, and in the confusion that they 
wrought they came near to the standard of Maedhros. They reaped not the 
reward that Morgoth promised them, for Maglor slew Uldor the accursed, the 
leader in treason, and the sons of Bor slew Ulfast and Ulwarth ere they 
themselves were slain. But new strength of evil Men came up that Uldor had 
summoned and kept hidden in the eastern hills, and the host of Maedhros was 
assailed now on three sides, and it broke, and was scattered, and fled this way 
and that. Yet fate saved the sons of Feanor, and though all were wounded none 
were slain, for they drew together, and gathering a remnant of the Noldor and the 
Naugrim about them they hewed a way out of the battle and escaped far away 
towards Mount Dolmed in the east. 

Last of all the eastern force to stand firm were the Dwarves of Belegost, and 
thus they won renown. For the Naugrim withstood fire more hardily than either 
Elves or Men, and it was their custom moreover to wear great masks in battle 
hideous to look upon; and those stood them in good stead against the dragons. 



And but for them Glaurung and his brood would have withered all that was left 
of the Noldor. But the Naugrim made a circle about him when he assailed them, 
and even his mighty armour was not full proof against the blows of their great 
axes; and when in his rage Glaurung turned and struck down Azaghal, Lord of 
Belegost, and crawled over him, with his last stroke Azaghal drove a knife into 
his belly, and so wounded him that he fled the field, and the beasts of Angband 
in dismay followed after him. Then the Dwarves raised up the body of Azaghal 
and bore it away; and with slow steps they walked behind singing a dirge in deep 
voices, as it were a funeral pomp in their country, and gave no heed more to their 
foes; and none dared to stay them. 

But now in the western battle Fingon and Turgon were assailed by a tide of 
foes thrice greater than all the force that was left to them. Gothmog, Lord of 
Balrogs, high-captain of Angband, was come; and he drove a dark wedge 
between the Elvenhosts, surrounding King Fingon, and thrusting Turgon and 
Hurin aside towards the Fen of Serech. Then he turned upon Fingon. That was a 
grim meeting. At last Fingon stood alone with his guard dead about him; and he 
fought with Gothmog, until another Balrog came behind and cast a thong of fire 
about him. Then Gothmog hewed him with his black axe, and a white flame 
sprang up from the helm of Fingon as it was cloven. Thus fell the High King of 
the Noldor; and they beat him into the dust with their maces, and his banner, 
blue and silver, they trod into the mire of his blood. 

The field was lost; but still Hurin and Huor and the remnant of the house of 
Haldor stood firm with Turgon of Gondolin, and the hosts of Morgoth could not 
yet win the Pass of Sirion. Then Hurin spoke to Turgon, saying: ‘Go now, lord, 
while time is! For in you lives the last hope of the Eldar, and while Gondolin 
stands Morgoth shall still know fear in his heart.’ 

But Turgon answered: ‘Not long now can Gondolin be hidden; and being 
discovered it must fall.’ 

Then Huor spoke and said: ‘Yet if it stands but a little while, then out of your 
house shall come the hope of Elves and Men. This I say to you, lord, with the 
eyes of death: though we part here for ever, and I shall not look on your white 
walls again, from you and from me a new star shall arise. Farewell! ’ 

And Maeglin, Turgon’s sister-son, who stood by, heard these words, and did 
not forget them; but he said nothing. 

Then Turgon took the counsel of Hurin and Huor, and summoning all that 
remained of the host of Gondolin and such of Fingon’s people as could be 
gathered he retreated towards the Pass of Sirion; and his captains Ecthelion and 
Glorfindel guarded the flanks to right and left, so that none of the enemy should 
pass them by. But the Men of Dor-lomin held the rearguard, as Hurin and Huor 



desired; for they did not wish in their hearts to leave the Northlands, and if they 
could not win back to their homes, there they would stand to the end. Thus was 
the treachery of Uldor redressed; and of all the deeds of war that the fathers of 
Men wrought in behalf of the Eldar, the last stand of the Men of Dor-lomin is 
most renowned. 

So it was that Turgon fought his way southward, until coming behind the 
guard of Hurin and Huor he passed down Sirion and escaped; and he vanished 
into the mountains and was hidden from the eyes of Morgoth. But the brothers 
drew the remnant of the Men of the house of Hador about them, and foot by foot 
they withdrew, until they came behind the Fen of Serech, and had the stream of 
Rivil before them. There they stood and gave way no more. 

Then all the hosts of Angband swarmed against them, and they bridged the 
stream with their dead, and encircled the remnant of Hithlum as a gathering tide 
about a rock. There as the sun westered on the sixth day, and the shadow of Ered 
Wethrin grew dark, Huor fell pierced with a venomed arrow in his eye, and all 
the valiant Men of Hador were slain about him in a heap; and the Ores hewed 
their heads and piled them as a mound of gold in the sunset. 

Last of all Hurin stood alone. Then he cast aside his shield, and wielded an 
axe two-handed; and it is sung that the axe smoked in the black blood of the 
troll-guard of Gothmog until it withered, and each time that he slew Hurin cried: 
‘Aure entuluva! Day shall come again!’ Seventy times he uttered that cry; but 
they took him at last alive, by the command of Morgoth, for the Ores grappled 
him with their hands, which clung to him still though he hewed off their arms; 
and ever their numbers were renewed, until at last he fell buried beneath them. 
Then Gothmog bound him and dragged him to Angband with mockery. 

Thus ended Nirnaeth Arnoediad, as the sun went down beyond the sea. Night 
fell in Hithlum, and there came a great storm of wind out of the West. 


Great was the triumph of Morgoth, and his design was accomplished in a 
manner after his own heart; for Men took the lives of Men, and betrayed the 
Eldar, and fear and hatred were aroused among those that should have been 
united against him. From that day the hearts of the Elves were estranged from 
Men, save only those of the Three Houses of the Edain. 

The realm of Fingon was no more; and the sons of Feanor wandered as leaves 
before the wind. Their arms were scattered, and their league broken; and they 
took to a wild and woodland life beneath the feet of Ered Lindon, mingling with 
the Green-elves of Ossiriand, bereft of their power and glory of old. In Brethil 
some few of the Haladin yet dwelt in the protection of their woods, and Handir 



son of Haldir was their lord; but to Hithlum came back never one of Fingon’s 
host, nor any of the Men of Hador’s house, nor any tidings of the battle and the 
fate of their lords. But Morgoth sent thither the Easterlings that had served him, 
denying them the rich lands of Beleriand which they coveted; and he shut them 
in Hithlum and forbade them to leave it. Such was the reward he gave them for 
their treachery to Maedhros: to plunder and harass the old and the women and 
the children of Hador’s people. The remnant of the Eldar of Hithlum were taken 
to the mines of the north and laboured there as thralls, save some that eluded him 
and escaped into the wilds and the mountains. 

The Ores and the wolves went freely through all the North, and came ever 
further southward into Beleriand, even as far as Nan-tathren, the Land of 
Willows, and the borders of Ossiriand, and none were safe in field or wild. 
Doriath indeed remained, and the halls of Nargothrond were hidden; but 
Morgoth gave small heed to them, either because he knew little of them, or 
because their hour was not yet come in the deep purposes of his malice. Many 
now fled to the Havens and took refuge behind Cirdan’s walls, and the mariners 
passed up and down the coast and harried the enemy with swift landings. But in 
the next year, ere the winter was come, Morgoth sent great strength over 
Hithlum and Nevrast, and they came down the rivers Brithon and Nenning and 
ravaged all the Falas, and besieged the walls of Brithombar and Eglarest. Smiths 
and miners and masters of fire they brought with them, and they set up great 
engines; and valiantly though they were resisted they broke the walls at last. 
Then the Havens were laid in ruin, and the tower of Barad Nimras cast down; 
and the most part of Cirdan’s people were slain or enslaved. But some went 
aboard ship and escaped by sea; and among them was Ereinion Gil-galad, the 
son of Fingon, whom his father had sent to the Havens after the Dagor 
Bragollach. This remnant sailed with Cirdan south to the Isle of Balar, and they 
made a refuge for all that could come thither; for they kept a foothold also at the 
Mouths of Sirion, and there many light and swift ships lay hid in the creeks and 
waters where the reeds were dense as a forest. 

And when Turgon heard of this he sent again his messengers to Sirion’s 
mouths, and besought the aid of Cirdan the Shipwright. At the bidding of Turgon 
Cirdan built seven swift ships, and they sailed out into the West; but no tidings 
of them came ever back to Balar, save of one, and the last. The mariners of that 
ship toiled long in the sea, and returning at last in despair they foundered in a 
great storm within sight of the coasts of Middle-earth; but one of them was saved 
by Ulmo from the wrath of Osse, and the waves bore him up, and cast him 
ashore in Nevrast. His name was Voronwe; and he was one of those that Turgon 
sent forth as messengers from Gondolin. 



Now the thought of Morgoth dwelt ever upon Turgon; for Turgon had escaped 
him, of all his foes that one whom he most desired to take or to destroy. And that 
thought troubled him, and marred his victory, for Turgon of the mighty house of 
Fingolfin was now by right King of all the Noldor; and Morgoth feared and 
hated the house of Fingolfin, because they had the friendship of Ulmo his foe, 
and because of the wounds that Fingolfin gave him with his sword. And most of 
all his kin Morgoth feared Turgon; for of old in Valinor his eye had lighted upon 
him, and whenever he drew near a shadow had fallen on his spirit, foreboding 
that in some time that yet lay hidden, from Turgon ruin should come to him. 












Therefore Hurin was brought before Morgoth, for Morgoth knew that he had 
the friendship of the King of Gondolin; but Hurin defied him, and mocked him. 
Then Morgoth cursed Hurin and Morwen and their offspring, and set a doom 
upon them of darkness and sorrow; and taking Hurin from prison he set him in a 
chair of stone upon a high place of Thangorodrim. There he was bound by the 
power of Morgoth, and Morgoth standing beside him cursed him again; and he 
said: 'Sit now there; and look out upon the lands where evil and despair shall 
come upon those whom thou lovest. Thou hast dared to mock me, and to 
question the power of Melkor, Master of the fates of Arda. Therefore with my 
eyes thou shalt see, and with my ears thou shalt hear; and never shalt thou move 
from this place until all is fulfilled unto its bitter end.’ 

And even so it came to pass; but it is not said that Hurin asked ever of 
Morgoth either mercy or death, for himself or for any of his kin. 


By the command of Morgoth the Ores with great labour gathered all the 
bodies of those who had fallen in the great battle, and all their harness and 
weapons, and piled them in a great mound in the midst of Anfauglith; and it was 
like a hill that could be seen from afar. Haudh-en-Ndengin the Elves named it, 
the Hill of Slain, and Haudh-en-Nirnaeth, the Hill of Tears. But grass came there 
and grew again long and green upon that hill, alone in all the desert that Morgoth 
made; and no creature of Morgoth trod thereafter upon the earth beneath which 
the swords of the Eldar and the Edain crumbled into rust. 












CHAPTER 21 



OF TURIN TURAMBAR 


Rian, daughter of Belegund, was the wife of Huor, son of Galdor; and she was 
wedded to him two months before he went with Hurin his brother to the Nirnaeth 
Arnoediad. When no tidings came of her lord she fled into the wild; but she was 
aided by the Grey-elves of Mithrim, and when her son Tuor was born they 
fostered him. Then Rian departed from Hithlum, and going to the Haudh-en- 
Ndengin she laid herself down upon it and died. 

Morwen, daughter of Baragund, was the wife of Hurin, Lord of Dor-lomin; 
and their son was Turin, who was born in the year that Beren Erchamion came 
upon Luthien in the Forest of Neldoreth. A daughter they had also who was 
called Lalaith, which is Laughter, and she was beloved by Turin her brother; but 
when she was three years old there came a pestilence to Hithlum, borne on an 
evil wind out of Angband, and she died. 

Now after the Nirnaeth Arnoediad Morwen abode still in Dor-lomin, for Turin 
was but eight years old, and she was again with child. Those days were evil; for 
the Easterlings that came into Hithlum despised the remnant of the people of 
Hador, and they oppressed them, and took their lands and their goods, and 
enslaved their children. But so great was the beauty and majesty of the Lady of 
Dor-lomin that the Easterlings were afraid, and dared not to lay hands upon her 
or her household; and they whispered among themselves, saying that she was 
perilous, and a witch skilled in magic and in league with the Elves. Yet she was 
now poor and without aid, save that she was succoured secretly by a kinswoman 
of Hurin named Aerin, whom Brodda, an Easterling, had taken as his wife; and 
Morwen feared greatly that Turin would be taken from her and enslaved. 
Therefore it came into her heart to send him away in secret, and to beg King 
Thingol to harbour him, for Beren son of Barahir was her father’s kinsman, and 
he had been moreover a friend of Hurin, ere evil befell. Therefore in the autumn 
of the Year of Lamentation Morwen sent Turin forth over the mountains with 
two aged servants, bidding them find entry, if they could, into the kingdom of 
Doriath. Thus was the fate of Turin woven, which is fulltold in that lay that is 
called Nam i Hm Hurin, the Tale of the Children of Hurin, and is the longest of 
all the lays that speak of those days. Here that tale is told in brief, for it is woven 
with the fate of the Silmarils and of the Elves; and it is called the Tale of Grief, 
for it is sorrowful, and in it are revealed most evil works of Morgoth Bauglir. 

In the first beginning of the year Morwen gave birth to her child, the daughter 
of Hurin; and she named her Nienor, which is Mourning. But Turin and his 
companions passing through great perils came at last to the borders of Doriath; 



and there they were found by Beleg Strongbow, chief of the marchwardens of 
King Thingol, who led them to Menegroth. Then Thingol received Turin, and 
took him even to his own fostering, in honour of Hurin the Steadfast; for 
Thingol’s mood was changed towards the houses of the Elf-friends. Thereafter 
messengers went north to Hithlum, bidding Morwen leave Dor-lomin and return 
with them to Doriath; but still she would not leave the house in which she had 
dwelt with Hurin. And when the Elves departed she sent with them the Dragon- 
helm of Dor-lomin, greatest of the heirlooms of the house of Hador. 

Turin grew fair and strong in Doriath, but he was marked with sorrow. For 
nine years he dwelt in Thingol’s halls, and during that time his grief grew less; 
for messengers went at times to Hithlum, and returning they brought better 
tidings of Morwen and Nienor. But there came a day when the messengers did 
not return out of the north, and Thingol would send no more. Then Turin was 
filled with fear for his mother and his sister, and in grimness of heart he went 
before the King and asked for mail and sword; and he put on the Dragon-helm of 
Dor-lomin and went out to battle on the marches of Doriath, and became the 
companion in arms of Beleg Cuthalion. 

And when three years had passed, Turin returned again to Menegroth; but he 
came from the wild, and was unkempt, and his gear and garments were 
wayworn. Now one there was in Doriath, of the people of the Nandor, high in the 
counsels of the King; Saeros was his name. He had long begrudged to Turin the 
honour he received as Thingol’s fosterson; and seated opposite to him at the 
board he taunted him, saying: ‘If the Men of Hithlum are so wild and fell, of 
what sort are the women of that land? Do they run like deer clad only in their 
hair?’ Then Turin in great anger took up a drinking-vessel, and cast it at Saeros; 
and he was grievously hurt. 

On the next day Saeros waylaid Turin as he set out from Menegroth to return 
to the marches; but Turin overcame him, and set him to run naked as a hunted 
beast through the woods. Then Saeros fleeing in terror before him fell into the 
chasm of a stream, and his body was broken on a great rock in the water. But 
others coming saw what was done, and Mablung was among them; and he bade 
Turin return with him to Menegroth and abide the judgement of the King, 
seeking his pardon. But Turin, deeming himself now an outlaw and fearing to be 
held captive, refused Mablung’s bidding, and turned swiftly away; and passing 
through the Girdle of Melian he came into the woods west of Sirion. There he 
joined himself to a band of such houseless and desperate men as could be found 
in those evil days lurking in the wild; and their hands were turned against all 
who came in their path, Elves and Men and Ores. 

But when all that had befallen was told and searched out before Thingol, the 



King pardoned Turin, holding him wronged. In that time Beleg Strongbow 
returned from the north marches and came to Menegroth, seeking him; and 
Thingol spoke to Beleg, saying: T grieve, Cuthalion; for I took Hurin’s son as 
my son, and so he shall remain, unless Hurin himself should return out of the 
shadows to claim his own. I would not have any say that Turin was driven forth 
unjustly into the wild, and gladly would I welcome him back; for I loved him 
well.’ 

And Beleg answered: ‘I will seek Turin until I find him, and I will bring him 
back to Menegroth, if I can; for I love him also.’ 

Then Beleg departed from Menegroth, and far across Beleriand he sought in 
vain for tidings of Turin through many perils. 

But Turin abode long among the outlaws, and became their captain; and he 
named himself Neithan, the Wronged. Very warily they dwelt in the wooded 
lands south of Teiglin; but when a year had passed since Turin fled from Doriath, 
Beleg came upon their lair by night. It chanced that at that time Turin was gone 
from the camp; and the outlaws seized Beleg and bound him, and treated him 
cruelly, for they feared him as a spy of the King of Doriath. But Turin returning 
and seeing what was done, was stricken with remorse for all their evil and 
lawless deeds; and he released Beleg, and they renewed their friendship, and 
Turin foreswore thenceforward war or plunder against all save the servants of 
Angband. 

Then Beleg told Turin of King Thingol’s pardon; and he sought to persuade 
him by all means that he might to return with him to Doriath, saying that there 
was great need of his strength and valour on the north marches of the realm. 'Of 
late the Ores have found a way down out of Taur-nu-Fuin,’ he said; They have 
made a road through the Pass of Anach.’ 

‘I do not remember it,’ said Turin. 

‘Never did we go so far from the borders,’ said Beleg. ‘But you have seen the 
peaks of the Crissaegrim far off, and to the east the dark walls of the Gorgoroth. 
Anach lies between, above the high springs of Mindeb, a hard and dangerous 
road; yet many come by it now, and Dimbar which used to be in peace is falling 
under the Black Hand, and the Men of Brethil are troubled. We are needed 
there.’ 

But in the pride of his heart Turin refused the pardon of the King, and the 
words of Beleg were of no avail to change his mood. And he for his part urged 
Beleg to remain with him in the lands west of Sirion; but that Beleg would not 
do, and he said: ‘Hard you are, Turin, and stubborn. Now the turn is mine. If you 
wish indeed to have the Strongbow beside you, look for me in Dimbar; for 
thither I shall return.’ 



On the next day Beleg set out, and Turin went with him a bowshot from the 
camp; but he said nothing. ‘Is it farewell, then, son of Hurin ? 5 said Beleg. Then 
Turin looked out westward, and he saw far off the great height of Amon Rudh; 
and unwitting of what lay before him he answered: ‘You have said, seek me in 
Dimbar. But I say, seek for me on Amon Rudh! Else, this is our last farewell.’ 
Then they parted, in friendship, yet in sadness. 






Now Beleg returned to the Thousand Caves, and coming before Thingol and 
Melian he told them of all that had befallen, save only of his evil handling by 
Turin’s companions. Then Thingol sighed, and he said: ‘What more would Turin 
have me do?’ 

‘Give me leave, lord,’ said Beleg, ‘and I will guard him and guide him as I 
may; then no man shall say that elven-words are lightly spoken. Nor would I 
wish to see so great a good run to nothing in the wild.’ 

Then Thingol gave Beleg leave to do as he would; and he said: ‘Beleg 
Cuthalion! For many deeds you have earned my thanks; but not the least is the 
finding of my fosterson. At this parting ask for any gift, and I will not deny it to 
you.’ 

‘I ask then for a sword of worth,’ said Beleg; ‘for the Ores come now too thick 
and close for a bow only, and such blade as I have is no match for their armour.’ 

‘Choose from all that I have,’ said Thingol, ‘save only Aranruth, my own.’ 

Then Beleg chose Anglachel; and that was a sword of great worth, and it was 
so named because it was made of iron that fell from heaven as a blazing star; it 
would cleave all earth-delved iron. One other sword only in Middle-earth was 
like to it. That sword does not enter into this tale, though it was made of the 
same ore by the same smith; and that smith was Eol the Dark Elf, who took 
Aredhel Turgon’s sister to wife. He gave Anglachel to Thingol as fee, which he 
begrudged, for leave to dwell in Nan Elmoth; but its mate Anguirel he kept, until 
it was stolen from him by Maeglin, his son. 

But as Thingol turned the hilt of Anglachel towards Beleg, Melian looked at 
the blade; and she said: ‘There is malice in this sword. The dark heart of the 
smith still dwells in it. It will not love the hand it serves; neither will it abide 
with you long.’ 

‘Nonetheless I will wield it while I may,’ said Beleg. 

‘Another gift I will give to you, Cuthalion,’ said Melian, ‘that shall be your 
help in the wild, and the help also of those whom you choose.’ And she gave him 
store of lembas, the waybread of the Elves, wrapped in leaves of silver, and the 
threads that bound it were sealed at the knots with the seal of the Queen, a wafer 
of white wax shaped as a single flower of Telperion; for according to the 
customs of the Eldalie the keeping and giving of lembas belonged to the Queen 
alone. In nothing did Melian show greater favour to Turin than in this gift; for 
the Eldar had never before allowed Men to use this waybread, and seldom did so 
again. 



Then Beleg departed with these gifts from Menegroth and went back to the 
north marches, where he had his lodges, and many friends. Then in Dimbar the 
Ores were driven back, and Anglachel rejoiced to be unsheathed; but when the 
winter came, and war was stilled, suddenly his companions missed Beleg, and he 
returned to them no more. 

Now when Beleg parted from the outlaws and returned into Doriath, Turin led 
them away westward out of Sirion’s vale; for they grew weary of their life 
without rest, ever watchful and in fear of pursuit, and they sought for a safer lair. 
And it chanced at a time of evening that they came upon three Dwarves, who 
fled before them; but one that lagged behind was seized and thrown down, and a 
man of the company took his bow and let fly an arrow at the others as they 
vanished in the dusk. Now the dwarf that they had taken was named Mim; and 
he pleaded for his life before Turin, and offered as ransom to lead them to his 
hidden halls which none might find without his aid. Then Turin pitied Mim, and 
spared him; and he said: ‘Where is your house?’ 

Then Mim answered: ‘High above the lands lies the house of Mim, upon the 
great hill; Amon Rudh is that hill called now, since the Elves changed all the 
names.’ 

Then Turin was silent, and he looked long upon the dwarf; and at last he said: 
‘You shall bring us to that place.’ 

On the next day they set out thither, following Mim to Amon Rudh. Now that 
hill stood upon the edge of the moor-lands that rose between the vales of Sirion 
and Narog, and high above the stony heath it reared its crown; but its steep grey 
head was bare, save for the red seregon that mantled the stone. And as the men 
of Turin’s band drew near, the sun westering broke through the clouds, and fell 
upon the crown; and the seregon was all in flower. Then one among them said: 
‘There is blood on the hill-top.’ 

But Mim led them by secret paths up the steep slopes of Amon Rudh; and at 
the mouth of his cave he bowed to Turin, saying: ‘Enter into Bar-en-Danwedh, 
the House of Ransom; for so it shall be called.’ 

And now there came another dwarf bearing light to greet him, and they spoke 
together, and passed swiftly down into the darkness of the cave; but Turin 
followed after, and came at length to a chamber far within, lit by dim lamps 
hanging upon chains. There he found Mim kneeling at a stone couch beside the 
wall, and he tore his beard, and wailed, crying one name unceasingly; and on the 
couch there lay a third. But Turin entering stood beside Mim, and offered him 
aid. Then Mim looked up at him, and said: ‘You can give no aid. For this is 
Khim, my son; and he is dead, pierced by an arrow. He died at sunset. Ibun my 
son has told me.’ 



Then pity rose in Turin’s heart, and he said to Mim: ‘Alas! I would recall that 
shaft, if I could. Now Bar-en-Danwedh this house shall be called in truth; and if 
ever I come to any wealth, I will pay you a ransom of gold for your son, in token 
of sorrow, though it gladden your heart no more.’ 

Then Mim rose, and looked long at Turin. ‘I hear you,’ he said. ‘You speak 
like a dwarf-lord of old; and at that I marvel. Now my heart is cooled, though it 
is not glad; and in this house you may dwell, if you will; for I will pay my 
ransom.’ 

So began the abiding of Turin in the hidden house of Mim upon Amon Rudh; 
and he walked on the greensward before the mouth of the cave, and looked out 
east, and west, and north. Northward he looked, and descried the forest of 
Brethil climbing green about Amon Obel in its midst, and thither his eyes were 
drawn ever and again, he knew not why; for his heart was set rather to the north¬ 
west, where league upon league away on the skirts of the sky it seemed to him 
that he could glimpse the Mountains of Shadow, the walls of his home. But at 
evening Turin looked west into the sunset, as the sun rode down red into the 
hazes above the distant coasts, and the Vale of Narog lay deep in the shadows 
between. 

In the time that followed Turin spoke much with Mim, and sitting with him 
alone he listened to his lore and the tale of his life. For Mim came of Dwarves 
that were banished in ancient days from the great Dwarf-cities of the east, and 
long before the return of Morgoth they wandered westward into Beleriand; but 
they became diminished in stature and in smith-craft, and they took to lives of 
stealth, walking with bowed shoulders and furtive steps. Before the Dwarves of 
Nogrod and Belegost came west over the mountains the Elves of Beleriand knew 
not what these others were, and they hunted them, and slew them; but afterwards 
they let them alone, and they were called Noegyth Nibin, the Petty-Dwarves, in 
the Sindarin tongue. They loved none but themselves, and if they feared and 
hated the Ores, they hated the Eldar no less, and the Exiles most of all; for the 
Noldor, they said, had stolen their lands and their homes. Long ere King Finrod 
Felagund came over the Sea, the caves of Nargothrond were discovered by them, 
and by them its delving was begun; and beneath the crown of Amon Rudh, the 
Bald Hill, the slow hands of the Petty-Dwarves had bored and deepened the 
caves through the long years that they dwelt there, untroubled by the Grey-elves 
of the woods. But now at last they had dwindled and died out of Middle-earth, 
all save Mim and his two sons; and Mim was old even in the reckoning of 
Dwarves, old and forgotten. And in his halls the smithies were idle, and the axes 
msted, and their name was remembered only in ancient tales of Doriath and 
Nargothrond. 










But when the year drew on to midwinter, snow came down from the north 
heavier than they had known it in the river-vales, and Amon Rudh was covered 
deep; and they said that the winters worsened in Beleriand as the power of 
Angband grew. Then only the hardiest dared stir abroad; and some fell sick, and 
all were pinched with hunger. But in the dim dusk of a winter’s day there 
appeared suddenly among them a man, as it seemed, of great bulk and girth, 
cloaked and hooded in white; and he walked up to the fire without a word. And 
when men sprang up in fear, he laughed, and threw back his hood, and beneath 
his wide cloak he bore a great pack; and in the light of the fire Turin looked 
again on the face of Beleg Cuthalion. 

Thus Beleg returned once more to Turin, and their meeting was glad; and with 
him he brought out of Dimbar the Dragon-helm of Dor-lomin, thinking that it 
might lift Turin’s thought again above his life in the wilderness as the leader of a 
petty company. But still Turin would not return to Doriath; and Beleg yielding to 
his love against his wisdom remained with him, and did not depart, and in that 
time he laboured much for the good of Turin’s company. Those that were hurt or 
sick he tended, and gave to them the lembas of Melian; and they were quickly 
healed, for though the Grey-elves were less in skill and knowledge than the 
Exiles from Valinor, in the ways of the life of Middle-earth they had a wisdom 
beyond the reach of Men. And because Beleg was strong and enduring, 
farsighted in mind as in eye, he came to be held in honour among the outlaws; 
but the hatred of Mim for the Elf that had come into Bar-en-Danwedh grew ever 
greater, and he sat with Ibun his son in the deepest shadows of his house, 
speaking to none. But Turin paid now little heed to the Dwarf; and when winter 
passed, and spring came, they had sterner work to do. 

Who knows now the counsels of Morgoth? Who can measure the reach of his 
thought, who had been Melkor, mighty among the Ainur of the Great Song, and 
sat now, a dark lord upon a dark throne in the North, weighing in his malice all 
the tidings that came to him, and perceiving more of the deeds and purposes of 
his enemies than even the wisest of them feared, save only Melian the Queen? 
To her often the thought of Morgoth reached out, and there was foiled. 

And now again the might of Angband was moved; and as the long fingers of a 
groping hand the forerunners of his armies probed the ways into Beleriand. 
Through Anach they came, and Dimbar was taken, and all the north marches of 
Doriath. Down the ancient road they came that led through the long defile of 
Sirion, past the isle where Minas Tirith of Finrod had stood, and so through the 
land between Malduin and Sirion, and on through the eaves of Brethil to the 



Crossings of Teiglin. Thence the road went on into the Guarded Plain; but the 
Ores did not go far upon it, as yet, for there dwelt now in the wild a terror that 
was hidden, and upon the red hill were watchful eyes of which they had not been 
warned. For Turin put on again the Helm of Hador; and far and wide in 
Beleriand the whisper went, under wood and over stream and through the passes 
of the hills, saying that the Helm and Bow that had fallen in Dimbar had arisen 
again beyond hope. Then many who went leaderless, dispossessed but 
undaunted, took heart again, and came to seek the Two Captains. Dor-Cuarthol, 
the Land of Bow and Helm, was in that time named all the region between 
Teiglin and the west march of Doriath; and Turin named himself anew, Gorthol, 
the Dread Helm, and his heart was high again. In Menegroth, and in the deep 
halls of Nargothrond, and even in the hidden realm of Gondolin, the fame of the 
deeds of the Two Captains was heard; and in Angband also they were known. 
Then Morgoth laughed, for now by the Dragon-helm was Hurin’s son revealed to 
him again; and ere long Amon Rudh was ringed with spies. 

In the waning of the year Mim the Dwarf and Ibun his son went out from Bar- 
en-Danwedh to gather roots in the wild for their winter store; and they were 
taken captive by Ores. Then for a second time Mim promised to guide his 
enemies by the secret paths to his home on Amon Rudh; but yet he sought to 
delay the fulfilment of his promise, and demanded that Gorthol should not be 
slain. Then the Orc-captain laughed, and he said to Mim: ‘Assuredly Turin son 
of Hurin shall not be slain.’ 

Thus was Bar-en-Danwedh betrayed, for the Ores came upon it by night at 
unawares, guided by Mim. There many of Turin’s company were slain as they 
slept; but some fleeing by an inner stair came out upon the hill-top, and there 
they fought until they fell, and their blood flowed out upon the seregon that 
mantled the stone. But a net was cast over Turin as he fought, and he was 
enmeshed in it, and overcome, and led away. 

And at length when all was silent again Mim crept out of the shadows of his 
house; and as the sun rose over the mists of Sirion he stood beside the dead men 
on the hill-top. But he perceived that not all those that lay there were dead; for 
by one his gaze was returned, and he looked in the eyes of Beleg the Elf. Then 
with hatred long-stored Mim stepped up to Beleg, and drew forth the sword 
Anglachel that lay beneath the body of one that had fallen beside him; but Beleg 
stumbling up seized back the sword and thrust it at the Dwarf, and Mim in terror 
fled wailing from the hill-top. And Beleg cried after him: ‘The vengeance of the 
house of Hador will find you yet! ’ 

Now Beleg was sorely wounded, but he was mighty among the Elves of 
Middle-earth, and he was moreover a master of healing. Therefore he did not 



die, and slowly his strength returned; and he sought in vain among the dead for 
Turin, to bury him. But he found him not; and then he knew that Hurin’s son was 
yet alive, and taken to Angband. 

With little hope Beleg departed from Amon Rudh and set out northward, 
towards the Crossings of Teiglin, following in the track of the Ores; and he 
crossed over the Brithiach and journeyed through Dimbar towards the Pass of 
Anach. And now he was not far behind them, for he went without sleeping, 
whereas they had tarried on their road, hunting in the lands and fearing no 
pursuit as they came northward; and not even in the dreadful woods of Taur-nu- 
Fuin did he swerve from the trail, for the skill of Beleg was greater than any that 
have been in Middle-earth. But as he passed by night through that evil land he 
came upon one lying asleep at the foot of a great dead tree; and Beleg staying his 
steps beside the sleeper saw that it was an Elf. Then he spoke to him, and gave 
him lembas, and asked him what fate had brought him to that terrible place; and 
he named himself Gwindor, son of Guilin. 

Grieving Beleg looked upon him; for Gwindor was now but a bent and fearful 
shadow of his former shape and mood, when in the Nirnaeth Arnoediad that lord 
of Nargothrond rode with rash courage to the very doors of Angband, and there 
was taken. For few of the Noldor whom Morgoth captured were put to death, 
because of their skill in forging and in mining for metals and gems; and Gwindor 
was not slain, but put to labour in the mines of the North. By secret tunnels 
known only to themselves the mining Elves might sometimes escape; and thus it 
came to pass that Beleg found him, spent and bewildered in the mazes of Taur- 
nu-Fuin. 

And Gwindor told him that as he lay and lurked among the trees he saw a 
great company of Ores passing northwards, and wolves went with them; and 
among them was a Man, whose hands were chained, and they drove him onward 
with whips. ‘Very tall he was,’ said Gwindor, ‘as tall as are the Men from the 
misty hills of Hithlum/ Then Beleg told him of his own errand in Taur-nu-Fuin; 
and Gwindor sought to dissuade him from his quest, saying that he would but 
join Turin in the anguish that awaited him. But Beleg would not abandon Turin, 
and despairing himself he aroused hope again in Gwindor’s heart; and together 
they went on, following the Ores until they came out of the forest on the high 
slopes that ran down to the barren dunes of Anfauglith. There within sight of the 
peaks of Thangorodrim the Ores made their encampment in a bare dell as the 
light of day was failing, and setting wolf-sentinels all about they fell to 
carousing. A great storm rode up out of the west, and lightning glittered on the 
Shadowy Mountains far away, as Beleg and Gwindor crept towards the dell. 

When all in the camp were sleeping Beleg took his bow, and in the darkness 



shot the wolf-sentinels, one by one and silently. Then in great peril they entered 
in, and they found Turin fettered hand and foot and tied to a withered tree; and 
all about him knives that had been cast at him were embedded in the trunk, and 
he was senseless in a sleep of great weariness. But Beleg and Gwindor cut the 
bonds that held him, and lifting him they carried him out of the dell; yet they 
could bear him no further than to a thicket of thorn-trees a little way above. 
There they laid him down; and now the storm drew very near. Beleg drew his 
sword Anglachel, and with it he cut the fetters that bound Turin; but fate was 
that day more strong, for the blade slipped as he cut the shackles, and Turin’s 
foot was pricked. Then he was aroused into a sudden wakefulness of rage and 
fear, and seeing one bending over him with naked blade he leapt up with a great 
cry, believing that Ores were come again to torment him; and grappling with him 
in the darkness he seized Anglachel, and slew Beleg Cuthalion thinking him a 
foe. 

But as he stood, finding himself free, and ready to sell his life dearly against 
imagined foes, there came a great flash of lightning above them; and in its light 
he looked down on Beleg’s face. Then Turin stood stonestill and silent, staring 
on that dreadful death, knowing what he had done; and so terrible was his face, 
lit by the lightning that flickered all about them, that Gwindor cowered down 
upon the ground and dared not raise his eyes. 

But now in the dell beneath the Ores were aroused, and all the camp was in a 
tumult; for they feared the thunder that came out of the west, believing that it 
was sent against them by the great Enemies beyond the Sea. Then a wind arose, 
and great rains fell, and torrents swept down from the heights of Taur-nu-Fuin; 
and though Gwindor cried out to Turin, warning him of their utmost peril, he 
made no answer, but sat unmoving and unweeping in the tempest beside the 
body of Beleg Cuthalion. 

When morning came the storm was passed away eastward over Lothlann, and 
the sun of autumn rose hot and bright; but believing that Turin would have fled 
far away from that place and all trace of his flight be washed away, the Ores 
departed in haste without longer search, and far off Gwindor saw them marching 
away over the steaming sands of Anfauglith. Thus it came to pass that they 
returned to Morgoth emptyhanded, and left behind them the son of Hurin, who 
sat crazed and unwitting on the slopes of Taur-nu-Fuin, bearing a burden heavier 
than their bonds. 

Then Gwindor roused Turin to aid him in the burial of Beleg, and he rose as 
one that walked in sleep; and together they laid Beleg in a shallow grave, and 
placed beside him Belthronding his great bow, that was made of black yew- 
wood. But the dread sword Anglachel Gwindor took, saying that it were better 



that it should take vengeance on the servants of Morgoth than lie useless in the 
earth; and he took also the lembas of Melian to strengthen them in the wild. 

Thus ended Beleg Strongbow, truest of friends, greatest in skill of all that 
harboured in the woods of Beleriand in the Elder Days, at the hand of him whom 
he most loved; and that grief was graven on the face of Turin and never faded. 
But courage and strength were renewed in the Elf of Nargothrond, and departing 
from Taur-nu-Fuin he led Turin far away. Never once as they wandered together 
on long and grievous paths did Turin speak, and he walked as one without wish 
or purpose, while the year waned and winter drew on over the northern lands. 
But Gwindor was ever beside him to guard him and guide him; and thus they 
passed westward over Sirion and came at length to Eithel Ivrin, the springs 
whence Narog rose beneath the Mountains of Shadow. There Gwindor spoke to 
Turin, saying: ‘Awake, Turin son of Hurin Thalion! On Ivrin’s lake is endless 
laughter. She is fed from crystal fountains unfailing, and guarded from 
defilement by Ulmo, Lord of Waters, who wrought her beauty in ancient days.’ 
Then Turin knelt and drank from that water; and suddenly he cast himself down, 
and his tears were unloosed at last, and he was healed of his madness. 

There he made a song for Beleg, and he named it Laer Cu Beleg, the Song of 
the Great Bow, singing it aloud heedless of peril. And Gwindor gave the sword 
Anglachel into his hands, and Turin knew that it was heavy and strong and had 
great power; but its blade was black and dull and its edges blunt. Then Gwindor 
said: ‘This is a strange blade, and unlike any that I have seen in Middle-earth. It 
mourns for Beleg even as you do. But be comforted; for I return to Nargothrond 
of the house of Finarfin, and you shall come with me, and be healed and 
renewed.’ 

‘Who are you?’ said Turin. 

‘A wandering Elf, a thrall escaped, whom Beleg met and comforted,’ said 
Gwindor. ‘Yet once I was Gwindor son of Guilin, a lord of Nargothrond, until I 
went to the Nirnaeth Arnoediad, and was enslaved in Angband.’ 

‘Then have you seen Hurin son of Galdor, the warrior of Dor-lomin?’ said 
Turin. 

‘I have not seen him,’ said Gwindor. ‘But rumour of him runs through 
Angband that he still defies Morgoth; and Morgoth has laid a curse upon him 
and all his kin.’ 

‘That I do believe,’ said Turin. 

And now they arose, and departing from Eithel Ivrin they journeyed 
southward along the banks of Narog, until they were taken by scouts of the Elves 
and brought as prisoners to the hidden stronghold. Thus did Turin come to 
Nargothrond. 






At first his own people did not know Gwindor, who went out young and 
strong, and returned now seeming as one of the aged among mortal Men, 
because of his torments and his labours; but Finduilas daughter of Orodreth the 
King knew him and welcomed him, for she had loved him before the Nirnaeth, 
and so greatly did Gwindor love her beauty that he named her Faelivrin, which is 
the gleam of the sun on the pools of Ivrin. For Gwindor’s sake Turin was 
admitted with him into Nargothrond, and he dwelt there in honour. But when 
Gwindor would tell his name, Turin checked him, saying: T am Agarwaen the 
son of Umarth (which is the Bloodstained, son of Ill-fate), a hunter in the 
woods’; and the Elves of Nargothrond questioned him no more. 

In the time that followed Turin grew high in favour with Orodreth, and well- 
nigh all hearts were turned to him in Nargothrond. For he was young, and only 
now reached his full manhood; and he was in truth the son of Morwen Eledhwen 
to look upon: dark-haired and pale-skinned, with grey eyes, and his face more 
beautiful than any other among mortal Men, in the Elder Days. His speech and 
bearing were that of the ancient kingdom of Doriath, and even among the Elves 
he might be taken for one from the great houses of the Noldor; therefore many 
called him Adanedhel, the Elf-Man. The sword Anglachel was forged anew for 
him by cunning smiths of Nargothrond, and though ever black its edges shone 
with pale fire; and he named it Gurthang, Iron of Death. So great was his 
prowess and skill in warfare on the confines of the Guarded Plain that he himself 
became known as Mormegil, the Black Sword; and the Elves said: The 
Mormegil cannot be slain, save by mischance, or an evil arrow from afar.’ 
Therefore they gave him dwarf-mail, to guard him; and in a grim mood he found 
also in the armouries a dwarf-mask all gilded, and he put it on before battle, and 
his enemies fled before his face. 

Then the heart of Finduilas was turned from Gwindor and against her will her 
love was given to Turin; but Turin did not perceive what had befallen. And 
being torn in heart Finduilas became sorrowful; and she grew wan and silent. 
But Gwindor sat in dark thought; and on a time he spoke to Finduilas, saying: 
'Daughter of the house of Finarfin, let no grief lie between us; for though 
Morgoth has laid my life in ruin, you still I love. Go whither love leads you; yet 
beware! It is not fitting that the Elder Children of Iluvatar should wed with the 
Younger; nor is it wise, for they are brief, and soon pass, to leave us in 
widowhood while the world lasts. Neither will fate suffer it, unless it be once or 
twice only, for some high cause of doom that we do not perceive. But this Man is 



not Beren. A doom indeed lies on him, as seeing eyes may well read in him, but 
a dark doom. Enter not into it! And if you will, your love shall betray you to 
bitterness and death. For hearken to me! Though he be indeed agarwaen son of 
umarth, his right name is Turin son of Hurin, whom Morgoth holds in Angband, 
and whose kin he has cursed. Doubt not the power of Morgoth Bauglir! Is it not 
written in me?’ 

Then Finduilas sat long in thought; but at the last she said only: ‘Turin son of 
Hurin loves me not; nor will.’ 

Now when Turin learnt from Finduilas of what had passed, he was wrathful, 
and he said to Gwindor: ‘In love I hold you for rescue and safe-keeping. But 
now you have done ill to me, friend, to betray my right name, and call my doom 
upon me, from which I would lie hid.’ 

But Gwindor answered: ‘The doom lies in yourself, not in your name.’ 

When it became known to Orodreth that the Mormegil was in truth the son of 
Hurin Thalion he gave him great honour, and Turin became mighty among the 
people of Nargothrond. But he had no liking for their manner of warfare, of 
ambush and stealth and secret arrow, and he yearned for brave strokes and battle 
in the open; and his counsels weighed with the King ever the longer the more. In 
those days the Elves of Nargothrond forsook their secrecy and went openly to 
battle, and great store of weapons were made; and by the counsel of Turin the 
Noldor built a mighty bridge over the Narog from the Doors of Felagund, for the 
swifter passage of their arms. Then the servants of Angband were driven out of 
all the land between Narog and Sirion eastward, and westward to the Nenning 
and the desolate Falas; and though Gwindor spoke ever against Turin in the 
council of the King, holding it an ill policy, he fell into dishonour and none 
heeded him, for his strength was small and he was no longer forward in arms. 
Thus Nargothrond was revealed to the wrath and hatred of Morgoth; but still at 
Turin’s prayer his true name was not spoken, and though the fame of his deeds 
came into Doriath and to the ears of Thingol, rumour spoke only of the Black 
Sword of Nargothrond. 











In that time of respite and hope, when because of the deeds of the Mormegil 
the power of Morgoth was stemmed west of Sirion, Morwen fled at last from 
Dor-lomin with Nienor her daughter, and adventured the long journey to 
Thingol’s halls. There new grief awaited her, for she found Turin gone, and to 
Doriath there had come no tidings since the Dragon-helm had vanished from the 
lands west of Sirion; but Morwen remained in Doriath with Nienor as guests of 
Thingol and Melian, and were treated with honour. 

Now it came to pass, when four hundred and ninety-five years had passed 
since the rising of the Moon, in the spring of the year, there came to Nargothrond 
two Elves, named Gelmir and Arminas; they were of Angrod’s people, but since 
the Dagor Bragollach they dwelt in the south with Cirdan the Shipwright. From 
their far journeys they brought tidings of a great mustering of Ores and evil 
creatures under the eaves of Ered Wethrin and in the Pass of Sirion; and they told 
also that Ulmo had come to Cirdan, giving warning that great peril drew nigh to 
Nargothrond. 

‘Hear the words of the Lord of Waters!’ said they to the King. ‘Thus he spoke 
to Cirdan the Shipwright: “The Evil of the North has defiled the springs of 
Sirion, and my power withdraws from the fingers of the flowing waters. But a 
worse thing is yet to come forth. Say therefore to the Lord of Nargothrond: Shut 
the doors of the fortress and go not abroad. Cast the stones of your pride into the 
loud river, that the creeping evil may not find the gate.’” 

Orodreth was troubled by the dark words of the messengers, but Turin would 
by no means hearken to these counsels, and least of all would he suffer the great 
bridge to be cast down; for he was become proud and stern, and would order all 
things as he wished. 

Soon afterwards Handir Lord of Brethil was slain, for the Ores invaded his 
land, and Handir gave them battle; but the Men of Brethil were worsted, and 
driven back into their woods. And in the autumn of the year, biding his hour, 
Morgoth loosed upon the people of Narog the great host that he had long 
prepared; and Glaurung the Uruloki passed over Anfauglith, and came thence 
into the north vales of Sirion and there did great evil. Under the shadows of Ered 
Wethrin he defiled the Eithel Ivrin, and thence he passed into the realm of 
Nargothrond, and burned the Talath Dirnen, the Guarded Plain, between Narog 
and Teiglin. 

Then the warriors of Nargothrond went forth, and tall and terrible on that day 
looked Turin, and the heart of the host was upheld, as he rode on the right hand 



of Orodreth. But greater far was the host of Morgoth than any scouts had told, 
and none but Turin defended by his dwarf-mask could withstand the approach of 
Glaurung; and the Elves were driven back and pressed by the Ores into the field 
of Tumhalad, between Ginglith and Narog, and there they were penned. On that 
day all the pride and host of Nargothrond withered away; and Orodreth was slain 
in the forefront of the battle, and Gwindor son of Guilin was wounded to the 
death. But Turin came to his aid, and all fled before him; and he bore Gwindor 
out of the rout, and escaping into a wood there laid him on the grass. 

Then Gwindor said to Turin: 'Let bearing pay for bearing! But ill-fated was 
mine, and vain is thine; for my body is marred beyond healing, and I must leave 
Middle-earth. And though I love thee, son of Hurin, yet I rue the day that I took 
thee from the Ores. But for thy prowess and thy pride, still I should have love 
and life, and Nargothrond should yet stand a while. Now if thou love me, leave 
me! Haste thee to Nargothrond, and save Finduilas. And this last I say to thee: 
she alone stands between thee and thy doom. If thou fail her, it shall not fail to 
find thee. Farewell ! 5 

Then Turin sped back to Nargothrond, mustering such of the rout as he met 
with on the way; and the leaves fell from the trees in a great wind as they went, 
for the autumn was passing to a dire winter. But the host of the Ores and 
Glaurung the Dragon were there before him, and they came suddenly, ere those 
that were left on guard were aware of what had befallen on the field of 
Tumhalad. In that day the bridge over Narog proved an evil; for it was great and 
mightily made and could not swiftly be destroyed, and the enemy came readily 
over the deep river, and Glaurung came in full fire against the Doors of 
Felagund, and overthrew them, and passed within. 

And even as Turin came up the dreadful sack of Nargothrond was well nigh 
achieved. The Ores had slain or driven off all that remained in arms, and were 
even then ransacking the great halls and chambers, plundering and destroying; 
but those of the women and maidens that were not burned or slain they had 
herded on the terraces before the doors, as slaves to be taken into Morgoth’s 
thraldom. Upon this ruin and woe Turin came, and none could withstand him; or 
would not, though he struck down all before him, and passed over the bridge, 
and hewed his way towards the captives. 

And now he stood alone, for the few that followed him had fled. But in that 
moment Glaurung issued from the gaping doors, and lay behind, between Turin 
and the bridge. Then suddenly he spoke, by the evil spirit that was in him, 
saying: 'Hail, son of Hurin. Well met!’ 

Then Turin sprang about, and strode against him, and the edges of Gurthang 
shone as with flame; but Glaurung withheld his blast, and opened wide his 



serpent-eyes and gazed upon Turin. Without fear Turin looked into them as he 
raised up the sword; and straightway he fell under the binding spell of the lidless 
eyes of the dragon, and was halted moveless. Then for a long time he stood as 
one graven of stone; and they two were alone, silent before the doors of 
Nargothrond. But Glaurung spoke again, taunting Turin, and he said: 'Evil have 
been all thy ways, son of Hurin. Thankless fosterling, outlaw, slayer of thy 
friend, thief of love, usurper of Nargothrond, captain foolhardy, and deserter of 
thy kin. As thralls thy mother and thy sister live in Dor-lomin, in misery and 
want. Thou art arrayed as a prince, but they go in rags; and for thee they yearn, 
but thou carest not for that. Glad may thy father be to learn that he hath such a 
son; as learn he shall.’ And Turin being under the spell of Glaurung hearkened to 
his words, and he saw himself as in a mirror misshapen by malice, and loathed 
that which he saw. 

And while he was yet held by the eyes of the dragon in torment of mind, and 
could not stir, the Ores drove away the herded captives, and they passed nigh to 
Turin and crossed over the bridge. Among them was Finduilas, and she cried out 
to Turin as she went; but not until her cries and the wailing of the captives was 
lost upon the northward road did Glaurung release Turin, and he might not stop 
his ears against that voice that haunted him after. 

Then suddenly Glaurung withdrew his glance, and waited; and Turin stirred 
slowly, as one waking from a hideous dream. Then coming to himself he sprang 
upon the dragon with a cry. But Glaurung laughed, saying: ‘If thou wilt be slain, 
I will slay thee gladly. But small help will that be to Morwen and Nienor. No 
heed didst thou give to the cries of the Elf-woman. Wilt thou deny also the bond 
of thy blood?’ 

But Turin drawing back his sword stabbed at the dragon’s eyes; and Glaumng 
coiling back swiftly towered above him, and said: ‘Nay! At least thou art valiant; 
beyond all whom I have met. And they lie who say that we of our part do not 
honour the valour of foes. See now! I offer thee freedom. Go to thy kin, if thou 
canst. Get thee gone! And if Elf or Man be left to make tale of these days, then 
surely in scorn they will name thee, if thou spurnest this gift.’ 

Then Turin, being yet bemused by the eyes of the dragon, as were he treating 
with a foe that could know pity, believed the words of Glaurung; and turning 
away he sped over the bridge. But as he went Glaurung spoke behind him, 
saying in a fell voice: ‘Haste thee now, son of Hurin, to Dor-lomin! Or perhaps 
the Ores shall come before thee, once again. And if thou tarry for Finduilas, then 
never shalt thou see Morwen again, and never at all shalt thou see Nienor thy 
sister; and they will curse thee.’ 

But Turin passed away on the northward road, and Glaurung laughed once 



more, for he had accomplished the errand of his Master. Then he turned to his 
own pleasure, and sent forth his blast, and burned all about him. But all the Ores 
that were busy in the sack he routed forth, and drove them away, and denied 
them their plunder even to the last thing of worth. The bridge then he broke 
down and cast into the foam of Narog; and being thus secure he gathered all the 
hoard and riches of Felagund and heaped them, and lay upon them in the 
innermost hall, and rested a while. 

And Turin hastened along the ways to the north, through the lands now 
desolate between Narog and Teiglin, and the Fell Winter came down to meet 
him; for in that year snow fell ere autumn was passed, and spring came late and 
cold. Ever it seemed to him as he went that he heard the cries of Finduilas, 
calling his name by wood and hill, and great was his anguish; but his heart being 
hot with the lies of Glaurung, and seeing ever in his mind the Ores burning the 
house of Hurin or putting Morwen and Nienor to torment, he held on his way, 
and turned never aside. 














At last worn by haste and the long road (for forty leagues and more had he 
journeyed without rest) he came with the first ice of winter to the pools of Ivrin, 
where before he had been healed. But they were now but a frozen mire, and he 
could drink there no more. 

Thus he came hardly by the passes of Dor-lomin, through bitter snows from 
the north, and found again the land of his childhood. Bare and bleak it was; and 
Morwen was gone. Her house stood empty, broken and cold; and no living thing 
dwelt nigh. Therefore Turin departed, and came to the house of Brodda the 
Easterling, he that had to wife Aerin, Hurin’s kinswoman; and there he learned 
of an old servant that Morwen was long gone, for she had fled with Nienor out 
of Dor-lomin, none but Aerin knew where. 

Then Turin strode to Brodda’s table, and seizing him he drew his sword, and 
demanded that he be told whither Morwen had gone; and Aerin declared to him 
that she went to Doriath to seek her son. Tor the lands were freed then from 
evil,’ she said, ‘by the Black Sword of the south, who now has fallen, they say.’ 
Then Turin’s eyes were opened, and the last threads of Glaurung’s spell were 
loosed; and for anguish, and wrath at the lies that had deluded him, and hatred of 
the oppressors of Morwen, a black rage seized him, and he slew Brodda in his 
hall, and other Easterlings that were his guests. Thereafter he fled out into the 
winter, a hunted man; but he was aided by some that remained of Hador’s people 
and knew the ways of the wild, and with them he escaped through the falling 
snow and came to an outlaws’ refuge in the southern mountains of Dor-lomin. 
Thence Turin passed again from the land of his childhood, and returned to 
Sirion’s vale. His heart was bitter, for to Dor-lomin he had brought only greater 
woe upon the remnant of his people, and they were glad of his going; and this 
comfort alone he had: that by the prowess of the Black Sword the ways to 
Doriath had been laid open to Morwen. And he said in his thought: ‘Then those 
deeds wrought not evil to all. And where else might I have better bestowed my 
kin, even had I come sooner? For if the Girdle of Melian be broken, then last 
hope is ended. Nay, it is better indeed as things be; for a shadow I cast 
wheresoever I come. Let Melian keep them! And I will leave them in peace 
unshadowed for a while.’ 

Now Turin coming down from Ered Wethrin sought for Finduilas in vain, 
roaming the woods beneath the mountains, wild and wary as a beast; and he 
waylaid all the roads that went north to the Pass of Sirion. But he was too late; 
for all the trails had grown old, or were washed away by the winter. Yet thus it 



was that passing southwards down Teiglin Turin came upon some of the Men of 
Brethil that were surrounded by Ores; and he delivered them, for the Ores fled 
from Gurthang. He named himself Wildman of the Woods, and they besought 
him to come and dwell with them; but he said that he had an errand yet 
unachieved, to seek Finduilas, Orodreth’s daughter of Nargothrond. Then Dorlas, 
the leader of those woodmen, told the grievous tidings of her death. For the Men 
of Brethil had waylaid at the Crossings of Teiglin the Ore-host that led the 
captives of Nargothrond, hoping to rescue them; but the Ores had at once cruelly 
slain their prisoners, and Finduilas they pinned to a tree with a spear. So she 
died, saying at the last: ‘Tell the Mormegil that Finduilas is here.’ Therefore they 
had laid her in a mound near that place, and named it Haudh-en-Elleth, the 
Mound of the Elf-maid. 

Turin bade them lead him thither, and there he fell down into a darkness of 
grief that was near death. Then Dorlas by his black sword, the fame whereof had 
come even into the deeps of Brethil, and by his quest of the King’s daughter, 
knew that this Wildman was indeed the Mormegil of Nargothrond, whom 
rumour said was the son of Hurin of Dorlomin. Therefore the woodmen lifted 
him up, and bore him away to their homes. Now those were set in a stockade 
upon a high place in the forest, Ephel Brandir upon Amon Obel; for the People 
of Haleth were now dwindled by war, and Brandir son of Handir who ruled them 
was a man of gentle mood, and lame also from childhood, and he trusted rather 
in secrecy than in deeds of war to save them from the power of the North. 
Therefore he feared the tidings that Dorlas brought, and when he beheld the face 
of Turin as he lay on the bier a cloud of foreboding lay on his heart. Nonetheless 
being moved by his woe he took him into his own house and tended him, for he 
had skill in healing. And with the beginning of spring Turin cast off his 
darkness, and grew hale again; and he arose, and he thought that he would 
remain in Brethil hidden, and put his shadow behind him, forsaking the past. He 
took therefore a new name, Turambar, which in the High-elven speech signified 
Master of Doom; and he besought the woodmen to forget that he was a stranger 
among them or ever bore any other name. Nonetheless he would not wholly 
leave deeds of war; for he could not endure that the Ores should come to the 
Crossings of Teiglin or draw nigh to Haudh-en-Elleth, and he made that a place 
of dread for them, so that they shunned it. But he laid his black sword by, and 
wielded rather the bow and the spear. 










Now new tidings came to Doriath concerning Nargothrond, for some that had 
escaped from the defeat and the sack and had survived the Fell Winter in the 
wild, came at last to Thingol seeking refuge; and the march-wardens brought 
them to the King. And some said that all the enemy had withdrawn northwards, 
and others that Glaurung abode still in the halls of Felagund; and some said that 
the Mormegil was slain, and others that he was cast under a spell by the dragon 
and dwelt there yet, as one changed to stone. But all declared that it was known 
to many in Nargothrond ere the end that Mormegil was none other than Turin 
son of Hurin of Dor-lomin. 

Then Morwen was distraught, and refusing the counsel of Melian she rode 
forth alone into the wild to seek her son, or some true tidings of him. Thingol 
therefore sent Mablung after her, with many hardy march-wards, to find her and 
guard her, and to learn what news they might; but Nienor was bidden to remain 
behind. Yet the fearlessness of her house was hers; and in an evil hour, in hope 
that Morwen would return when she saw that her daughter would go with her 
into peril, Nienor disguised herself as one of Thingol’s people, and went with 
that ill-fated riding. 

They came upon Morwen by the banks of Sirion, and Mablung besought her 
to return to Menegroth; but she was fey, and would not be persuaded. Then also 
the coming of Nienor was revealed, and despite Morwen’s command she would 
not go back; and Mablung perforce brought them to the hidden ferries at the 
Meres of Twilight, and they passed over Sirion. And after three days’ journeying 
they came to Amon Ethir, the Hill of Spies, that long ago Felagund had caused to 
be raised with great labour, a league before the doors of Nargothrond. There 
Mablung set a guard of riders about Morwen and her daughter, and forbade them 
to go further. But he, seeing from the hill no sign of any enemy, went down with 
his scouts to the Narog, as stealthily as they could go. 

But Glaurung was aware of all that they did, and he came forth in heat of 
wrath, and lay into the river; and a vast vapour and foul reek went up, in which 
Mablung and his company were blinded and lost. Then Glaurung passed east 
over Narog. 

Seeing the onset of the dragon the guards upon Amon Ethir sought to lead 
Morwen and Nienor away, and fly with them with all speed back eastwards; but 
the wind bore the blank mists upon them, and their horses were maddened by the 
dragon-stench, and were ungovernable, and ran this way and that, so that some 



were dashed against trees and were slain, and others were borne far away. Thus 
the ladies were lost, and of Morwen indeed no sure tidings came ever to Doriath 
after. But Nienor, being thrown by her steed, yet unhurt, made her way back to 
Amon Ethir, there to await Mablung, and came thus above the reek into the 
sunlight; and looking westward she stared straight into the eyes of Glaurung, 
whose head lay upon the hill-top. 

Her will strove with him for a while, but he put forth his power, and having 
learned who she was he constrained her to gaze into his eyes, and he laid a spell 
of utter darkness and forgetfulness upon her, so that she could remember nothing 
that had ever befallen her, nor her own name, nor the name of any other thing; 
and for many days she could neither hear, nor see, nor stir by her own will. Then 
Glaurung left her standing alone upon Amon Ethir, and went back to 
Nargothrond. 

Now Mablung, who greatly daring had explored the halls of Felagund when 
Glaurung left them, fled from them at the approach of the dragon, and returned 
to Amon Ethir. The sun sank and night fell as he climbed the hill, and he found 
none there save Nienor, standing alone under the stars as an image of stone. No 
word she spoke or heard, but would follow, if he took up her hand. Therefore in 
great grief he led her away, though it seemed to him vain; for they were both like 
to perish, succourless in the wild. 

But they were found by three of Mablung’s companions, and slowly they 
journeyed northward and eastward towards the fences of the land of Doriath 
beyond Sirion, and the guarded bridge nigh to the inflowing of Esgalduin. 
Slowly the strength of Nienor returned as they drew nearer to Doriath; but still 
she could not speak or hear, and walked blindly as she was led. But even as they 
drew near the fences at last she closed her staring eyes, and would sleep; and 
they laid her down, and rested also, unheedfully, for they were utterly outworn. 
There they were assailed by an Ore-band, such as now roamed often as nigh the 
fences of Doriath as they dared. But Nienor in that hour recovered hearing and 
sight, and being awakened by the cries of the Ores she sprang up in terror, and 
fled ere they could come to her. 

Then the Ores gave chase, and the Elves after; and they overtook the Ores and 
slew them ere they could harm her, but Nienor escaped them. For she fled as in a 
madness of fear, swifter than a deer, and tore off all her clothing as she ran, until 
she was naked; and she passed out of their sight, running northward, and though 
they sought her long they found her not, nor any trace of her. And at last 
Mablung in despair returned to Menegroth and told the tidings. Then Thingol 
and Melian were filled with grief; but Mablung went forth, and sought long in 
vain for tidings of Morwen and Nienor. 



But Nienor ran on into the woods until she was spent, and then fell, and slept, 
and awoke; and it was a sunlit morning, and she rejoiced in light as it were a new 
thing, and all things else that she saw seemed new and strange, for she had no 
names for them. Nothing did she remember save a darkness that lay behind her, 
and a shadow of fear; therefore she went warily as a hunted beast, and became 
famished, for she had no food and knew not how to seek it. But coming at last to 
the Crossings of Teiglin she passed over, seeking the shelter of the great trees of 
Brethil, for she was afraid, and it seemed to her that the darkness was overtaking 
her again from which she had fled. 

But it was a great storm of thunder that came up from the south, and in terror 
she cast herself down upon the mound of Haudh-en-Elleth, stopping her ears 
from the thunder; but the rain smote her and drenched her, and she lay like a 
wild beast that is dying. There Turambar found her, as he came to the Crossings 
of Teiglin, having heard rumour of Ores that roamed near; and seeing in a flare 
of lightning the body as it seemed of a slain maiden lying upon the mound of 
Finduilas he was stricken to the heart. But the woodmen lifted her up, and 
Turambar cast his cloak about her, and they took her to a lodge nearby, and 
warmed her, and gave her food. And as soon as she looked upon Turambar she 
was comforted, for it seemed to her that she had found at last something that she 
had sought in her darkness; and she would not be parted from him. But when he 
asked her concerning her name and her kin and her misadventure, then she 
became troubled as a child that perceives that something is demanded but cannot 
understand what it may be; and she wept. Therefore Turambar said: ‘Do not be 
troubled. The tale shall wait. But I will give you a name, and I will call you 
Niniel, Tear-maiden.’ And at that name she shook her head, but said: Niniel. 
That was the first word she spoke after her darkness, and it remained her name 
among the woodmen ever after. 

On the next day they bore her towards Ephel Brandir; but when they came to 
Dimrost, the Rainy Stair, where the tumbling stream of Celebros fell towards 
Teiglin, a great shuddering came upon her, wherefore afterwards that place was 
called Nen Girith, the Shuddering Water. Ere she came to the home of the 
woodmen upon Amon Obel she was sick of a fever; and long she lay thus, 
tended by the women of Brethil, and they taught her language as to an infant. 
But ere the autumn came by the skill of Brandir she was healed of her sickness, 
and she could speak; but nothing did she remember of the time before she was 
found by Turambar on the mound of Haudh-en-Elleth. And Brandir loved her; 
but all her heart was given to Turambar. 

In that time the woodmen were not troubled by the Ores, and Turambar went 
not to war, and there was peace in Brethil. His heart turned to Niniel, and he 



asked her in marriage; but for that time she delayed in spite of her love. For 
Brandir foreboded he knew not what, and sought to restrain her, rather for her 
sake than his own or rivalry with Turambar; and he revealed to her that 
Turambar was Turin son of Hurin, and though she knew not the name a shadow 
fell upon her mind. 

But when three years were passed since the sack of Nargothrond Turambar 
asked Niniel again, and vowed that now he would wed her, or else go back to 
war in the wild. And Niniel took him with joy, and they were wedded at the 
midsummer, and the woodmen of Brethil made a great feast. But ere the end of 
the year Glaurung sent Ores of his dominion against Brethil; and Turambar sat at 
home deedless, for he had promised to Niniel that he would go to battle only if 
their homes were assailed. But the woodmen were worsted, and Dorlas 
upbraided him that he would not aid the people that he had taken for his own. 
Then Turambar arose and brought forth again his black sword, and he gathered a 
great company of the Men of Brethil, and they defeated the Ores utterly. But 
Glaurung heard tidings that the Black Sword was in Brethil, and he pondered 
what he heard, devising new evil. 

In the spring of the year after Niniel conceived, and she became wan and sad; 
and at the same time there came to Ephel Brandir the first rumours that Glaurung 
had issued from Nargothrond. Then Turambar sent out scouts far afield, for now 
he ordered things as he would, and few gave heed to Brandir. As it drew near to 
summer Glaurung came to the borders of Brethil, and lay near the west shores of 
Teiglin; and then there was great fear among the woodfolk, for it was now plain 
that the Great Worm would assail them and ravage their land, and not pass by, 
returning to Angband, as they had hoped. They sought therefore the counsel of 
Turambar; and he counselled them that it was vain to go against Glaurung with 
all their force, for only by cunning and good fortune could they defeat him. He 
offered therefore himself to seek the dragon on the borders of the land, and bade 
the rest of the people to remain at Ephel Brandir, but to prepare for flight. For if 
Glaurung had the victory, he would come first to the woodmen’s homes to 
destroy them, and they could not hope to withstand him; but if they then 
scattered far and wide then many might escape, for Glaurung would not take up 
his dwelling in Brethil, and would return soon to Nargothrond. 

Then Turambar asked for companions willing to aid him in his peril; and 
Dorlas stood forth, but no others. Therefore Dorlas upbraided the people, and 
spoke scorn of Brandir, who could not play the part of the heir of the house of 
Haleth; and Brandir was shamed before his people, and was bitter at heart. But 
Hunthor, kinsman of Brandir, asked his leave to go in his stead. Then Turambar 
said farewell to Niniel, and she was filled with fear and foreboding, and their 



parting was sorrowful; but Turambar set out with his two companions and went 
to Nen Girith. 

Then Niniel being unable to endure her fear, and unwilling to wait in the 
Ephel tidings of Turambar’s fortune, set forth after him, and a great company 
went with her. At this Brandir was filled all the more with dread, and he sought 
to dissuade her and the people that would go with her from this rashness, but 
they heeded him not. Therefore he renounced his lordship, and all love for the 
people that had scorned him, and having naught left but his love for Niniel he 
girt himself with a sword and went after her; but being lame he fell far behind. 

Now Turambar came to Nen Girith at sundown, and there he learned that 
Glaurung lay on the brink of the high shores of Teiglin, and was like to move 
when night fell. Then he called those tidings good; for the dragon lay at Cabed- 
en-Aras, where the river ran in a deep and narrow gorge that a hunted deer might 
overleap, and Turambar thought that he would seek no further, but would 
attempt to pass over the gorge. Therefore he purposed to creep down at dusk, 
and descend into the ravine under night, and cross over the wild water; and then 
to climb up the further cliff, and so come to the dragon beneath his guard. 

This counsel he took, but the heart of Dorlas failed when they came to the 
races of Teiglin in the dark, and he dared not attempt the perilous crossing, but 
drew back and lurked in the woods, burdened with shame. Turambar and 
Hunthor, nonetheless, crossed over in safety, for the loud roaring of the water 
drowned all other sounds, and Glaurung slept. But ere the middle-night the 
dragon roused, and with a great noise and blast cast his forward part across the 
chasm, and began to draw his bulk after. Turambar and Hunthor were well-nigh 
overcome by the heat and the stench, as they sought in haste for a way up to 
come at Glaurung; and Hunthor was slain by a great stone that was dislodged 
from on high by the passage of the dragon, and smote him on the head and cast 
him into the river. So he ended, of the house of Haleth not the least valiant. 

Then Turambar summoned all his will and courage and climbed the cliff 
alone, and came beneath the dragon. Then he drew Gurthang, and with all the 
might of his arm, and of his hate, he thrust it into the soft belly of the Worm, 
even up to the hilts. But when Glaurung felt his death-pang, he screamed, and in 
his dreadful throe he heaved up his bulk and hurled himself across the chasm, 
and there lay lashing and coiling in his agony. And he set all in a blaze about 
him, and beat all to ruin, until at last his fires died, and he lay still. 

Now Gurthang had been wrested from Turambar’s hand in the throe of 
Glaurung, and it clave to the belly of the dragon. Turambar therefore crossed the 
water once more, desiring to recover his sword and to look upon his foe; and he 
found him stretched at his length, and rolled upon one side, and the hilts of 



Gurthang stood in his belly. Then Turambar seized the hilts and set his foot upon 
the belly, and cried in mockery of the dragon and his words at Nargothrond: 
‘Hail, Worm of Morgoth! Well met again! Die now and the darkness have thee! 
Thus is Turin son of Hurin avenged.’ 

Then he wrenched out the sword, but a spout of black blood followed it, and 
fell on his hand, and the venom burned it. And thereupon Glaurung opened his 
eyes and looked upon Turambar with such malice that it smote him as a blow; 
and by that stroke and the anguish of the venom he fell into a dark swoon, and 
lay as one dead, and his sword was beneath him. 

The screams of Glaurung rang in the woods, and came to the people that 
waited at Nen Girith; and when those that looked forth heard them, and saw afar 
the ruin and burning that the dragon made, they deemed that he had triumphed 
and was destroying those that assailed him. And Niniel sat and shuddered beside 
the falling water, and at the voice of Glaurung her darkness crept upon her again, 
so that she could not stir from that place of her own will. 

Even so Brandir found her, for he came to Nen Girith at last, limping wearily; 
and when he heard that the dragon had crossed the river and had beaten down his 
foes, his heart yearned towards Niniel in pity. Yet he thought also: ‘Turambar is 
dead, but Niniel lives. Now it may be that she will come with me, and I will lead 
her away, and so we shall escape from the dragon together.’ After a while 
therefore he stood by Niniel, and he said: ‘Come! It is time to go. If you will, I 
will lead you.’ And he took her hand, and she arose silently, and followed him; 
and in the darkness none saw them go. 

But as they went down the path to the Crossings the moon rose, and cast a 
grey light on the land, and Niniel said: ‘Is this the way?’ And Brandir answered 
that he knew no way, save to flee as they might from Glaurung, and escape into 
the wild. But Niniel said: ‘The Black Sword was my beloved and my husband. 
To seek him only do I go. What else could you think?’ And she sped on before 
him. Thus she came towards the Crossings of Teiglin and beheld Haudh-en- 
Elleth in the white moonlight, and great dread came on her. Then with a cry she 
turned away, casting off her cloak, and fled southward along the river, and her 
white raiment shone in the moon. 

Thus Brandir saw her from the hill-side, and turned to cross her path, but he 
was still behind her when she came to the ruin of Glaurung nigh the brink of 
Cabed-en-Aras. There she saw the dragon lying, but she heeded him not, for a 
man lay beside him; and she ran to Turambar, and called his name in vain. Then 
finding that his hand was burned she washed it with tears and bound it about 
with a strip of her raiment, and she kissed him and cried on him again to awake. 
Thereat Glaurung stirred for the last time ere he died, and he spoke with his last 



breath, saying: ‘Hail, Nienor, daughter of Hurin. We meet again ere the end. I 
give thee joy that thou hast found thy brother at last. And now thou shalt know 
him: a stabber in the dark, treacherous to foes, faithless to friends, and a curse 
unto his kin, Turin son of Hurin! But the worst of all his deeds thou shalt feel in 
thyself.’ 

Then Glaurung died, and the veil of his malice was taken from her, and she 
remembered all the days of her life. Looking down upon Turin she cried: 
‘Farewell, O twice beloved! A Turin Turambar turun ambartanen : master of 
doom by doom mastered! O happy to be dead!’ Then Brandir who had heard all, 
standing stricken upon the edge of ruin, hastened towards her; but she ran from 
him distraught with horror and anguish, and coming to the brink of Cabed-en- 
Aras she cast herself over, and was lost in the wild water. 

Then Brandir came and looked down, and turned away in horror; and though 
he no longer desired life, he could not seek death in that roaring water. And 
thereafter no man looked again upon Cabed-en-Aras, nor would any beast or 
bird come there, nor any tree grow; and it was named Cabed Naeramarth, the 
Leap of Dreadful Doom. 

But Brandir made his way back to Nen Girith, to bring tidings to the people; 
and he met Dorlas in the woods, and slew him: the first blood that ever he had 
spilled, and the last. And he came to Nen Girith, and men cried to him: ‘Have 
you seen her? For Niniel is gone.’ 

And he answered: ‘Niniel is gone for ever. The Dragon is dead, and Turambar 
is dead; and those tidings are good.’ The people murmured at these words, 
saying that he was crazed; but Brandir said: ‘Hear me to the end! Niniel the 
beloved is also dead. She cast herself into Teiglin, desiring life no more; for she 
learned that she was none other than Nienor daughter of Hurin of Dor-lomin, ere 
her forgetfulness came upon her, and that Turambar was her brother, Turin son 
of Hurin.’ 

But even as he ceased, and the people wept, Turin himself came before them. 
For when the dragon died, his swoon left him, and he fell into a deep sleep of 
weariness. But the cold of the night troubled him, and the hilts of Gurthang 
drove into his side, and he awoke. Then he saw that one had tended his hand, 
and he wondered much that he was left nonetheless to lie upon the cold ground; 
and he called, and hearing no answer he went in search of aid, for he was weary 
and sick. 

But when the people saw him they drew back in fear, thinking that it was his 
unquiet spirit; and he said: ‘Nay, be glad; for the Dragon is dead, and I live. But 
wherefore have you scorned my counsel, and come into peril? And where is 
Niniel? For her I would see. And surely you did not bring her from her home?’ 



Then Brandir told him that it was so, and Niniel was dead. But the wife of 
Dorlas cried out: ‘Nay, lord, he is crazed. For he came here saying that you were 
dead, and he called it good tidings. But you live.’ 

Then Turambar was wrathful, and believed that all Brandir said or did was 
done in malice towards himself and Niniel, begrudging their love; and he spoke 
evilly to Brandir, calling him Club-foot. Then Brandir reported all that he had 
heard, and named Niniel Nienor daughter of Hurin, and he cried out upon 
Turambar with the last words of Glaurung, that he was a curse unto his kin and 
to all that harboured him. 

Then Turambar fell into a fury, for in those words he heard the feet of his 
doom overtaking him; and he charged Brandir with leading Niniel to her death, 
and publishing with delight the lies of Glaurung, if indeed he devised them not 
himself. Then he cursed Brandir, and slew him; and he fled from the people into 
the woods. But after a while his madness left him, and he came to Haudh-en- 
Elleth, and there sat, and pondered all his deeds. And he cried upon Finduilas to 
bring him counsel; for he knew not whether he would do now more ill to go to 
Doriath to seek his kin, or to forsake them for ever and seek death in battle. 

And even as he sat there Mablung with a company of Grey-elves came over 
the Crossings of Teiglin, and he knew Turin, and hailed him, and was glad 
indeed to find him yet living; for he had learned of the coming forth of Glaurung 
and that his path led to Brethil, and also he had heard report that the Black 
Sword of Nargothrond now dwelt there. Therefore he came to give warning to 
Turin, and help if need be; but Turin said: ‘You come too late. The Dragon is 
dead.’ 

Then they marvelled, and gave him great praise; but he cared nothing for it, 
and said: ‘This only I ask: give me news of my kin, for in Dor-lomin I learned 
that they had gone to the Hidden Kingdom/ 

Then Mablung was dismayed, but needs must tell to Turin how Morwen was 
lost, and Nienor cast into a spell of dumb forgetfulness, and how she escaped 
them upon the borders of Doriath and fled northwards. Then at last Turin knew 
that doom had overtaken him, and that he had slain Brandir unjustly; so that the 
words of Glaurung were fulfilled in him. And he laughed as one fey, crying: 
‘This is a bitter jest indeed!’ But he bade Mablung go, and return to Doriath, 
with curses upon it. ‘And a curse too upon your errand!’ he cried. ‘This only was 
wanting. Now comes the night.’ 

Then he fled from them like the wind, and they were amazed, wondering what 
madness had seized him; and they followed after him. But Turin far out-ran 
them; and he came to Cabed-en-Aras, and heard the roaring of the water, and 
saw that all the leaves fell sere from the trees, as though winter had come. There 



he drew forth his sword, that now alone remained to him of all his possessions, 
and he said: ‘Hail Gurthang! No lord or loyalty dost thou know, save the hand 
that wieldeth thee. From no blood wilt thou shrink. Wilt thou therefore take 
Turin Turambar, wilt thou slay me swiftly ? 5 

And from the blade rang a cold voice in answer: ‘Yea, I will drink thy blood 
gladly, that so I may forget the blood of Beleg my master, and the blood of 
Brandir slain unjustly. I will slay thee swiftly . 5 

Then Turin set the hilts upon the ground, and cast himself upon the point of 
Gurthang, and the black blade took his life. But Mablung and the Elves came 
and looked on the shape of Glaurung lying dead, and upon the body of Turin, 
and they grieved; and when Men of Brethil came thither, and they learned the 
reasons of Turin’s madness and death, they were aghast; and Mablung said 
bitterly: ‘I also have been meshed in the doom of the Children of Hurin, and thus 
with my tidings have slain one that I loved . 5 

Then they lifted up Turin, and found that Gurthang had broken asunder. But 
Elves and Men gathered there great store of wood, and they made a mighty 
burning, and the Dragon was consumed to ashes. Turin they laid in a high 
mound where he had fallen, and the shards of Gurthang were laid beside him. 
And when all was done, the Elves sang a lament for the Children of Hurin, and a 
great grey stone was set upon the mound, and thereon was carven in runes of 
Doriath: 

TURIN TURAMBAR DAGNIR GLAURUNGA 
and beneath they wrote also: 

NIENOR NINIEL 

But she was not there, nor was it ever known whither the cold waters of 
Teiglin had taken her. 






CHAPTER 22 



OF THE RUIN OF DORIATH 


So ended the tale of Turin Turambar; but Morgoth did not sleep nor rest from 
evil, and his dealings with the house of Hador were not yet ended. Against them 
his malice was unsated, though Hurin was under his eye, and Morwen wandered 
distraught in the wild. 

Unhappy was the lot of Hurin; for all that Morgoth knew of the working of his 
malice Hurin knew also, but lies were mingled with the truth, and aught that was 
good was hidden or distorted. In all ways Morgoth sought most to cast an evil 
light on those things that Thingol and Melian had done, for he hated them, and 
feared them. When therefore he judged the time to be ripe, he released Hurin 
from his bondage, bidding him go whither he would; and he feigned that in this 
he was moved by pity as for an enemy utterly defeated. But he lied, for his 
purpose was that Hurin should still further his hatred for Elves and Men, ere he 
died. 

Then little though he trusted the words of Morgoth, knowing indeed that he 
was without pity, Hurin took his freedom, and went forth in grief, embittered by 
the words of the Dark Lord; and a year was now gone since the death of Turin 
his son. For twenty-eight years he had been captive in Angband, and he was 
grown grim to look upon. His hair and beard were white and long, but he walked 
unbowed, bearing a great black staff; and he was girt with a sword. Thus he 
passed into Hithlum, and tidings came to the chieftains of the Easterlings that 
there was a great riding of captains and black soldiers of Angband over the sands 
of Anfauglith, and with them came an old man, as one that was held in high 
honour. Therefore they did not lay hands on Hurin, but let him walk at will in 
those lands; in which they were wise, for the remnant of his own people shunned 
him, because of his coming from Angband as one in league and honour with 
Morgoth. 

Thus his freedom did but increase the bitterness of Hurin’s heart; and he 
departed from the land of Hithlum and went up into the mountains. Thence he 
descried far off amid the clouds the peaks of the Crissaegrim, and he 
remembered Turgon; and he desired to come again to the hidden realm of 
Gondolin. He went down therefore from Ered Wethrin, and he knew not that the 
creatures of Morgoth watched all his steps; and crossing over the Brithiach he 
passed into Dimbar, and came to the dark feet of the Echoriath. All the land was 
cold and desolate, and he looked about him with little hope, standing at the foot 
of a great fall of stones beneath a sheer rock-wall; and he knew not that this was 
all that was now left to see of the old Way of Escape: the Dry River was blocked, 



and the arched gate was buried. Then Hurin looked up to the grey sky, thinking 
that he might once more descry the eagles, as he had done long ago in his youth; 
but he saw only the shadows blown from the east, and clouds swirling about the 
inaccessible peaks, and he heard only the wind hissing over the stones. 

But the watch of the great eagles was now redoubled, and they marked Hurin 
well, far below, forlorn in the fading light; and straightway Thorondor himself, 
since the tidings seemed great, brought word to Turgon. But Turgon said: ‘Does 
Morgoth sleep? You were mistaken.’ 

‘Not so,’ said Thorondor. ‘If the Eagles of Manwe were wont to err thus, then 
long ago, lord, your hiding would have been in vain.’ 

‘Then your words bode ill,’ said Turgon; ‘for they can bear but one meaning. 
Even Hurin Thalion has surrendered to the will of Morgoth. My heart is shut.’ 

But when Thorondor was gone, Turgon sat long in thought, and he was 
troubled, remembering the deeds of Hurin of Dor-lomin; and he opened his 
heart, and sent to the eagles to seek for Hurin, and to bring him if they might to 
Gondolin. But it was too late, and they never saw him again in light or in 
shadow. 

For Hurin stood in despair before the silent cliffs of the Echoriath, and the 
westering sun, piercing the clouds, stained his white hair with red. Then he cried 
aloud in the wilderness, heedless of any ears, and he cursed the pitiless land; and 
standing at last upon a high rock he looked towards Gondolin and called in a 
great voice: ‘Turgon, Turgon, remember the Fen of Serech! O Turgon, will you 
not hear in your hidden halls?’ But there was no sound save the wind in the dry 
grasses. ‘Even so they hissed in Serech at the sunset,’ he said; and as he spoke 
the sun went behind the Mountains of Shadow, and a darkness fell about him, 
and the wind ceased, and there was silence in the waste. 

Yet there were ears that heard the words that Hurin spoke, and report of all 
came soon to the Dark Throne in the north; and Morgoth smiled, for he knew 
now clearly in what region Turgon dwelt, though because of the eagles no spy of 
his could yet come within sight of the land behind the Encircling Mountains. 
This was the first evil that the freedom of Hurin achieved. 

As darkness fell Hurin stumbled from the rock, and fell into a heavy sleep of 
grief. But in his sleep he heard the voice of Morwen lamenting, and often she 
spoke his name; and it seemed to him that her voice came out of Brethil. 
Therefore when he awoke with the coming of day he arose, and went back to the 
Brithiach; and passing along the eaves of Brethil he came at a time of night to 
the Crossings of Teiglin. The night-sentinels saw him, but they were filled with 
dread, for they thought that they saw a ghost out of some ancient battle-mound 
that walked with darkness about it; and therefore Hurin was not stayed, and he 



came at last to the place of the burning of Glaurung, and saw the tall stone 
standing near the brink of Cabed Naeramarth. 

But Hurin did not look at the stone, for he knew what was written there; and 
his eyes had seen that he was not alone. Sitting in the shadow of the stone there 
was a woman, bent over her knees; and as Hurin stood there silent she cast back 
her tattered hood and lifted her face. Grey she was and old, but suddenly her 
eyes looked into his, and he knew her; for though they were wild and full of fear, 
that light still gleamed in them that long ago had earned for her the name 
Eledhwen, proudest and most beautiful of mortal women in the days of old. 

‘You come at last,’ she said. ‘I have waited too long.’ 

‘It was a dark road. I have come as I could,’ he answered. 

‘But you are too late,’ said Morwen. ‘They are lost.’ 

‘I know it,’ he said. ‘But you are not.’ 

But Morwen said: ‘Almost. I am spent. I shall go with the sun. Now little time 
is left: if you know, tell me! How did she find him?’ 

But Hurin did not answer, and they sat beside the stone, and did not speak 
again; and when the sun went down Morwen sighed and clasped his hand, and 
was still; and Hurin knew that she had died. He looked down at her in the 
twilight and it seemed to him that the lines of grief and cruel hardship were 
smoothed away. ‘She was not conquered,’ he said; and he closed her eyes, and 
sat unmoving beside her as the night drew down. The waters of Cabed 
Naeramarth roared on, but he heard no sound, and he saw nothing, and felt 
nothing, for his heart was stone within him. But there came a chill wind that 
drove sharp rain into his face; and he was roused, and anger rose in him like 
smoke, mastering reason, so that all his desire was to seek vengeance for his 
wrongs and for the wrongs of his kin, accusing in his anguish all those who ever 
had dealings with them. Then he rose up, and he made a grave for Morwen 
above Cabed Naeramarth on the west side of the stone; and upon it he cut these 
words: Here lies also Morwen Eledhwen. 

It is told that a seer and harp-player of Brethil named Glirhuin made a song, 
saying that the Stone of the Hapless should not be defiled by Morgoth nor ever 
thrown down, not though the sea should drown all the land; as after indeed 
befell, and still Tol Morwen stands alone in the water beyond the new coasts that 
were made in the days of the wrath of the Valar. But Hurin does not lie there, for 
his doom drove him on, and the Shadow still followed him. 


Now Hurin crossed over Teiglin and passed southwards down the ancient road 
that led to Nargothrond; and he saw far off to the eastward the lonely height of 



Amon Rudh, and knew what had befallen there. At length he came to the banks 
of Narog, and ventured the passage of the wild river upon the fallen stones of the 
bridge, as Mablung of Doriath had ventured it before him; and he stood before 
the broken Doors of Felagund, leaning upon his staff. 

Here it must be told that after the departure of Glaurung Mim the Petty-Dwarf 
had found his way to Nargothrond, and crept within the ruined halls; and he took 
possession of them, and sat there fingering the gold and the gems, letting them 
mn ever through his hands, for none came nigh to despoil him, from dread of the 
spirit of Glaurung and his very memory. But now one had come, and stood upon 
the threshold; and Mim came forth, and demanded to know his purpose. But 
Hurin said: ‘Who are you, that would hinder me from entering the house of 
Finrod Felagund?’ 

Then the Dwarf answered: ‘I am Mim; and before the proud ones came from 
over the Sea, Dwarves delved the halls of Nulukkizdin. I have but returned to 
take what is mine; for I am the last of my people.’ 

‘Then you shall enjoy your inheritance no longer,’ said Hurin; ‘for I am Hurin 
son of Galdor, returned out of Angband, and my son was Turin Turambar, whom 
you have not forgotten; and he it was that slew Glaurung the Dragon, who 
wasted these halls where now you sit; and not unknown is it to me by whom the 
Dragon-helm of Dor-lomin was betrayed.’ 

Then Mim in great fear besought Hurin to take what he would, but to spare his 
life; but Hurin gave no heed to his prayer, and slew him there before the doors of 
Nargothrond. Then he entered in, and stayed a while in that dreadful place, 
where the treasures of Valinor lay strewn upon the floors in darkness and decay; 
but it is told that when Hurin came forth from the wreck of Nargothrond and 
stood again beneath the sky he bore with him out of all that great hoard but one 
thing only. 

Now Hurin journeyed eastward, and he came to the Meres of Twilight above 
the Falls of Sirion; and there he was taken by the Elves that guarded the western 
marches of Doriath, and brought before King Thingol in the Thousand Caves. 
Then Thingol was filled with wonder and grief when he looked on him, and 
knew that grim and aged man for Hurin Thalion, the captive of Morgoth; but he 
greeted him fairly and showed him honour. Hurin made no answer to the King, 
but drew forth from beneath his cloak that one thing which he had taken with 
him out of Nargothrond; and that was no lesser treasure than the Nauglamir, the 
Necklace of the Dwarves, that was made for Finrod Felagund long years before 
by the craftsmen of Nogrod and Belegost, most famed of all their works in the 
Elder Days, and prized by Finrod while he lived above all the treasures of 
Nargothrond. And Hurin cast it at the feet of Thingol with wild and bitter words. 



‘Receive thou thy fee/ he cried, ‘for thy fair keeping of my children and my 
wife! For this is the Nauglamir, whose name is known to many among Elves and 
Men; and I bring it to thee out of the darkness of Nargothrond, where Finrod thy 
kinsman left it behind him when he set forth with Beren son of Barahir to fulfil 
the errand of Thingol of DoriathF 

Then Thingol looked upon the great treasure, and knew it for the Nauglamir, 
and well did he understand Hurin’s intent; but being filled with pity he restrained 
his wrath, and endured Hurin’s scorn. And at the last Melian spoke, and said: 
‘Hurin Thalion, Morgoth hath bewitched thee; for he that seeth through 
Morgoth’s eyes, willing or unwilling, seeth all things crooked. Long was Turin 
thy son fostered in the halls of Menegroth, and shown love and honour as the son 
of the King; and it was not by the King’s will nor by mine that he came never 
back to Doriath. And afterwards thy wife and thy daughter were harboured here 
with honour and goodwill; and we sought by all means that we might to dissuade 
Morwen from the road to Nargothrond. With the voice of Morgoth thou dost 
now upbraid thy friends.’ 

And hearing the words of Melian Hurin stood moveless, and he gazed long 
into the eyes of the Queen; and there in Menegroth, defended still by the Girdle 
of Melian from the darkness of the Enemy, he read the truth of all that was done, 
and tasted at last the fullness of woe that was measured for him by Morgoth 
Bauglir. And he spoke no more of what was past, but stooping lifted up the 
Nauglamir from where it lay before Thingol’s chair, and he gave it to him, 
saying: ‘Receive now, lord, the Necklace of the Dwarves, as a gift from one who 
has nothing, and as a memorial of Hurin of Dor-lomin. For now my fate is 
fulfilled, and the purpose of Morgoth achieved; but I am his thrall no longer.’ 

Then he turned away, and passed out from the Thousand Caves, and all that 
saw him fell back before his face; and none sought to withstand his going, nor 
did any know whither he went. But it is said that Hurin would not live thereafter, 
being bereft of all purpose and desire, and cast himself at last into the western 
sea; and so ended the mightiest of the warriors of mortal Men. 


But when Hurin was gone from Menegroth, Thingol sat long in silence, 
gazing upon the great treasure that lay upon his knees; and it came into his mind 
that it should be remade, and in it should be set the Silmaril. For as the years 
passed Thingol’s thought turned unceasingly to the jewel of Feanor, and became 
bound to it, and he liked not to let it rest even behind the doors of his inmost 
treasury; and he was minded now to bear it with him always, waking and 
sleeping. 



In those days the Dwarves still came on their journeys into Beleriand from 
their mansions in Ered Findon, and passing over Gelion at Sam Athrad, the Ford 
of Stones, they travelled the ancient road to Doriath; for their skill in the 
working of metal and stone was very great, and there was much need of their 
craft in the halls of Menegroth. But they came now no longer in small parties as 
aforetime, but in great companies well armed for their protection in the perilous 
lands between Aros and Gelion; and they dwelt in Menegroth at such times in 
chambers and smithies set apart for them. At that very time great craftsmen of 
Nogrod were lately come into Doriath; and the King therefore summoning them 
declared his desire, that if their skill were great enough they should remake the 
Nauglamir, and in it set the Silmaril. Then the Dwarves looked upon the work of 
their fathers, and they beheld with wonder the shining jewel of Feanor; and they 
were filled with a great lust to possess them, and carry them off to their far 
homes in the mountains. But they dissembled their mind, and consented to the 
task. 

Fong was their labour; and Thingol went down alone to their deep smithies, 
and sat ever among them as they worked. In time his desire was achieved, and 
the greatest of the works of Elves and Dwarves were brought together and made 
one; and its beauty was very great, for now the countless jewels of the 
Nauglamir did reflect and cast abroad in marvellous hues the light of the Silmaril 
amidmost. Then Thingol, being alone among them, made to take it up and clasp 
it about his neck; but the Dwarves in that moment withheld it from him, and 
demanded that he yield it up to them, saying: ‘By what right does the Elvenking 
lay claim to the Nauglamir, that was made by our fathers for Finrod Felagund 
who is dead? It has come to him but by the hand of Hurin the Man of Dor-lomin, 
who took it as a thief out of the darkness of Nargothrond? But Thingol perceived 
their hearts, and saw well that desiring the Silmaril they sought but a pretext and 
fair cloak for their true intent; and in his wrath and pride he gave no heed to his 
peril, but spoke to them in scorn, saying: ‘How do ye of uncouth race dare to 
demand aught of me, Elu Thingol, Ford of Beleriand, whose life began by the 
waters of Cuivienen years uncounted ere the fathers of the stunted people 
awoke ? 5 And standing tall and proud among them he bade them with shameful 
words be gone unrequited out of Doriath. 

Then the lust of the Dwarves was kindled to rage by the words of the King; 
and they rose up about him, and laid hands on him, and slew him as he stood. So 
died in the deep places of Menegroth Elwe Singollo, King of Doriath, who alone 
of all the Children of Iluvatar was joined with one of the Ainur; and he who, 
alone of the Forsaken Elves, had seen the light of the Trees of Valinor, with his 
last sight gazed upon the Silmaril. 



Then the Dwarves taking the Nauglamir passed out of Menegroth and fled 
eastwards through Region. But tidings went swiftly through the forest, and few 
of that company came over Aros, for they were pursued to the death as they 
sought the eastward road; and the Nauglamir was retaken, and brought back in 
bitter grief to Melian the Queen. Yet two there were of the slayers of Thingol 
who escaped from the pursuit on the eastern marches, and returned at last to their 
city far off in the Blue Mountains; and there in Nogrod they told somewhat of all 
that had befallen, saying that the Dwarves were slain in Doriath by command of 
the Elvenking, who thus would cheat them of their reward. 

Then great was the wrath and lamentation of the Dwarves of Nogrod for the 
death of their kin and their great craftsmen, and they tore their beards, and 
wailed; and long they sat taking thought for vengeance. It is told that they asked 
aid from Belegost, but it was denied them, and the Dwarves of Belegost sought 
to dissuade them from their purpose; but their counsel was unavailing, and ere 
long a great host came forth from Nogrod, and crossing over Gelion marched 
westward through Beleriand. 


Upon Doriath a heavy change had fallen. Melian sat long in silence beside 
Thingol the King, and her thought passed back into the starlit years and to their 
first meeting among the nightingales of Nan Elmoth in ages past; and she knew 
that her parting from Thingol was the forerunner of a greater parting, and that 
the doom of Doriath was drawing nigh. For Melian was of the divine race of the 
Valar, and she was a Maia of great power and wisdom; but for love of Elwe 
Singollo she took upon herself the form of the Elder Children of Iluvatar, and in 
that union she became bound by the chain and trammels of the flesh of Arda. In 
that form she bore to him Luthien Tinuviel; and in that form she gained a power 
over the substance of Arda, and by the Girdle of Melian was Doriath defended 
through long ages from the evils without. But now Thingol lay dead, and his 
spirit had passed to the halls of Mandos; and with his death a change came also 
upon Melian. Thus it came to pass that her power was withdrawn in that time 
from the forests of Neldoreth and Region, and Esgalduin the enchanted river 
spoke with a different voice, and Doriath lay open to its enemies. 

Thereafter Melian spoke to none save to Mablung only, bidding him take heed 
to the Silmaril, and to send word speedily to Beren and Luthien in Ossiriand; and 
she vanished out of Middle-earth, and passed to the land of the Valar beyond the 
western sea, to muse upon her sorrows in the gardens of Lorien, whence she 
came, and this tale speaks of her no more. 

Thus it was that the host of the Naugrim crossing over Aros passed 



unhindered into the woods of Doriath; and none withstood them, for they were 
many and fierce, and the captains of the Grey-elves were cast into doubt and 
despair, and went hither and thither purposeless. But the Dwarves held on their 
way, and passed over the great bridge, and entered into Menegroth; and there 
befell a thing most grievous among the sorrowful deeds of the Elder Days. For 
there was battle in the Thousand Caves, and many Elves and Dwarves were 
slain; and it has not been forgotten. But the Dwarves were victorious, and the 
halls of Thingol were ransacked and plundered. There fell Mablung of the Heavy 
Hand before the doors of the treasury wherein lay the Nauglamir; and the 
Silmaril was taken. 

At that time Beren and Luthien yet dwelt in Tol Galen, the Green Isle, in the 
River Adurant, southernmost of the streams that falling from Ered Lindon 
flowed down to join with Gelion; and their son Dior Eluchil had to wife 
Nimloth, kinswoman of Celeborn, prince of Doriath, who was wedded to the 
Lady Galadriel. The sons of Dior and Nimloth were Elured and Elurin; and a 
daughter also was born to them, and she was named Elwing, which is Star-spray, 
for she was born on a night of stars, whose light glittered in the spray of the 
waterfall of Lanthir Lamath beside her father’s house. 

Now word went swiftly among the Elves of Ossiriand that a great host of 
Dwarves bearing gear of war had come down out of the mountains and passed 
over Gelion at the Ford of Stones. These tidings came soon to Beren and 
Luthien; and in that time also a messenger came to them out of Doriath telling of 
what had befallen there. Then Beren arose and left Tol Galen, and summoning to 
him Dior his son they went north to the River Ascar; and with them went many 
of the Green-elves of Ossiriand. 

Thus it came to pass that when the Dwarves of Nogrod, returning from 
Menegroth with diminished host, came again to Sarn Athrad, they were assailed 
by unseen enemies; for as they climbed up Gelion’s banks burdened with the 
spoils of Doriath, suddenly all the woods were filled with the sound of elven- 
horns, and shafts sped upon them from every side. There very many of the 
Dwarves were slain in the first onset; but some escaping from the ambush held 
together, and fled eastwards towards the mountains. And as they climbed the 
long slopes beneath Mount Dolmed there came forth the Shepherds of the Trees, 
and they drove the Dwarves into the shadowy woods of Ered Lindon: whence, it 
is said, came never one to climb the high passes that led to their homes. 

In that battle by Sarn Athrad Beren fought his last fight, and himself slew the 
Lord of Nogrod, and wrested from him the Necklace of the Dwarves; but he 
dying laid his curse upon all the treasure. Then Beren gazed in wonder on the 
selfsame jewel of Feanor that he had cut from Morgoth’s iron crown, now 



shining set amid gold and gems by the cunning of the Dwarves; and he washed it 
clean of blood in the waters of the river. And when all was finished the treasure 
of Doriath was drowned in the River Ascar, and from that time the river was 
named anew, Rathloriel, the Goldenbed; but Beren took the Nauglamir and 
returned to Tol Galen. Little did it ease the grief of Luthien to learn that the Lord 
of Nogrod was slain and many Dwarves beside; but it is said and sung that 
Luthien wearing that necklace and that immortal jewel was the vision of greatest 
beauty and glory that has ever been outside the realm of Valinor; and for a little 
while the Land of the Dead that Live became like a vision of the land of the 
Valar, and no place has been since so fair, so fruitful, or so filled with light. 

Now Dior Thingol’s heir bade farewell to Beren and Luthien, and departing 
from Lanthir Lamath with Nimloth his wife he came to Menegroth, and abode 
there; and with them went their young sons Elured and Elurin, and Elwing their 
daughter. Then the Sindar received them with joy, and they arose from the 
darkness of their grief for fallen kin and King and for the departure of Melian; 
and Dior Eluchil set himself to raise anew the glory of the kingdom of Doriath. 


There came a night of autumn, and when it grew late, one came and smote 
upon the doors of Menegroth, demanding admittance to the King. He was a lord 
of the Green-elves hastening from Ossiriand, and the door-wards brought him to 
where Dior sat alone in his chamber; and there in silence he gave to the King a 
coffer, and took his leave. But in that coffer lay the Necklace of the Dwarves, 
wherein was set the Silmaril; and Dior looking upon it knew it for a sign that 
Beren Erchamion and Luthien Tinuviel had died indeed, and gone where go the 
race of Men to a fate beyond the world. 

Long did Dior gaze upon the Silmaril, which his father and mother had 
brought beyond hope out of the terror of Morgoth; and his grief was great that 
death had come upon them so soon. But the wise have said that the Silmaril 
hastened their end; for the flame of the beauty of Luthien as she wore it was too 
bright for mortal lands. 

Then Dior arose, and about his neck he clasped the Nauglamir; and now he 
appeared as the fairest of all the children of the world, of threefold race: of the 
Edain, and of the Eldar, and of the Maiar of the Blessed Realm. 


But now the rumour ran among the scattered Elves of Beleriand that Dior 
Thingol’s heir wore the Nauglamir, and they said: 'A Silmaril of Feanor burns 
again in the woods of Doriath’; and the oath of the sons of Feanor was waked 



again from sleep. For while Luthien wore the Necklace of the Dwarves no Elf 
would dare to assail her; but now hearing of the renewal of Doriath and of Dior’s 
pride the seven gathered again from wandering, and they sent to him to claim 
their own. 

But Dior returned no answer to the sons of Feanor; and Celegorm stirred up 
his brothers to prepare an assault upon Doriath. They came at unawares in the 
middle of winter, and fought with Dior in the Thousand Caves; and so befell the 
second slaying of Elf by Elf. There fell Celegorm by Dior’s hand, and there fell 
Curufin, and dark Caranthir; but Dior was slain also, and Nimloth his wife, and 
the cruel servants of Celegorm seized his young sons and left them to starve in 
the forest. Of this Maedhros indeed repented, and sought for them long in the 
woods of Doriath; but his search was unavailing, and of the fate of Elured and 
Elurin no tale tells. 

Thus Doriath was destroyed, and never rose again. But the sons of Feanor 
gained not what they sought; for a remnant of the people fled before them, and 
with them was Elwing Dior’s daughter, and they escaped, and bearing with them 
the Silmaril they came in time to the mouths of the River Sirion by the sea. 


















CHAPTER 23 



OF TUQR AND THE FALL OF GONDOLIN 


It has been told that Huor the brother of Hurin was slain in the Battle of 
Unnumbered Tears; and in the winter of that year Rian his wife bore a child in 
the wilds of Mithrim, and he was named Tuor, and was taken to foster by Annael 
of the Grey-elves, who yet lived in those hills. Now when Tuor was sixteen 
years old the Elves were minded to leave the caves of Androth where they dwelt, 
and to make their way secretly to the Havens of Sirion in the distant south; but 
they were assailed by Ores and Easterlings before they made good their escape, 
and Tuor was taken captive and enslaved by Lorgan, chief of the Easterlings of 
Hithlum. For three years he endured that thraldom, but at the end of that time he 
escaped; and returning to the caves of Androth he dwelt there alone, and did 
such great hurt to the Easterlings that Lorgan set a price upon his head. 

But when Tuor had lived thus in solitude as an outlaw for four years, Ulmo set 
it in his heart to depart from the land of his fathers, for he had chosen Tuor as the 
instrument of his designs; and leaving once more the caves of Androth he went 
westwards across Dor-lomin, and found Annon-in-Gelydh, the Gate of the 
Noldor, which the people of Turgon built when they dwelt in Nevrast long years 
before. Thence a dark tunnel led beneath the mountains, and issued into Cirith 
Ninniach, the Rainbow Cleft, through which a turbulent water ran towards the 
western sea. Thus it was that Tuor’s flight from Hithlum was marked by neither 
Man nor Ore, and no knowledge of it came to the ears of Morgoth. 

And Tuor came into Nevrast, and looking upon Belegaer the Great Sea he was 
enamoured of it, and the sound of it and the longing for it were ever in his heart 
and ear, and an unquiet was on him that took him at last into the depths of the 
realms of Ulmo. Then he dwelt in Nevrast alone, and the summer of that year 
passed, and the doom of Nargothrond drew near; but when the autumn came he 
saw seven great swans flying south, and he knew them for a sign that he had 
tarried overlong, and he followed their flight along the shores of the sea. Thus he 
came at length to the deserted halls of Vinyamar beneath Mount Taras, and he 
entered in, and found there the shield and hauberk, and the sword and helm, that 
Turgon had left there by the command of Ulmo long before; and he arrayed 
himself in those arms, and went down to the shore. But there came a great storm 
out of the west, and out of that storm Ulmo the Lord of Waters arose in majesty 
and spoke to Tuor as he stood beside the sea. And Ulmo bade him depart from 
that place and seek out the hidden kingdom of Gondolin; and he gave Tuor a 
great cloak, to mantle him in shadow from the eyes of his enemies. 

But in the morning when the storm was passed, Tuor came upon an Elf 



standing beside the walls of Vinyamar; and he was Voronwe, son of Aranwe, of 
Gondolin, who sailed in the last ship that Turgon sent into the West. But when 
that ship returning at last out of the deep ocean foundered in the great storm 
within sight of the coasts of Middle-earth, Ulmo took him up, alone of all its 
mariners, and cast him onto the land near Vinyamar; and learning of the 
command laid upon Tuor by the Lord of Waters Voronwe was filled with 
wonder, and did not refuse him his guidance to the hidden door of Gondolin. 
Therefore they set out together from that place, and as the Fell Winter of that 
year came down upon them out of the north they went warily eastward under the 
eaves of the Mountains of Shadow. 

At length they came in their journeying to the Pools of Ivrin, and looked with 
grief on the defilement wrought there by the passage of Glaurung the Dragon; 
but even as they gazed upon it they saw one going northward in haste, and he 
was a tall Man, clad in black, and bearing a black sword. But they knew not who 
he was, nor anything of what had befallen in the south; and he passed them by, 
and they said no word. 

And at the last by the power that Ulmo set upon them they came to the hidden 
door of Gondolin, and passing down the tunnel they reached the inner gate, and 
were taken by the guard as prisoners. Then they were led up the mighty ravine of 
Orfalch Echor, barred by seven gates, and brought before Ecthelion of the 
Fountain, the warden of the great gate at the end of the climbing road; and there 
Tuor cast aside his cloak, and from the arms that he bore from Vinyamar it was 
seen that he was in truth one sent by Ulmo. Then Tuor looked down upon the 
fair vale of Tumladen, set as a green jewel amid the encircling hills; and he saw 
far off upon the rocky height of Amon Gwareth Gondolin the great, city of seven 
names, whose fame and glory is mightiest in song of all dwellings of the Elves in 
the Hither Lands. At the bidding of Ecthelion trumpets were blown on the towers 
of the great gate, and they echoed in the hills; and far off but clear there came a 
sound of answering trumpets blown upon the white walls of the city, flushed 
with the rose of dawn upon the plain. 

Thus it was that the son of Huor rode across Tumladen, and came to the gate 
of Gondolin; and passing up the wide stairways of the city he was brought at last 
to the Tower of the King, and looked upon the images of the Trees of Valinor. 
Then Tuor stood before Turgon son of Fingolfin, High King of the Noldor, and 
upon the King’s right hand there stood Maeglin his sister-son, but upon his left 
hand sat Idril Celebrindal his daughter; and all that heard the voice of Tuor 
marvelled, doubting that this were in truth a Man of mortal race, for his words 
were the words of the Lord of Waters that came to him in that hour. And he gave 
warning to Turgon that the Curse of Mandos now hastened to its fulfilment, 



when all the works of the Noldor should perish; and he bade him depart, and 
abandon the fair and mighty city that he had built, and go down Sirion to the sea. 

Then Turgon pondered long the counsel of Ulmo, and there came into his 
mind the words that were spoken to him in Vinyamar: 'Love not too well the 
work of thy hands and the devices of thy heart; and remember that the true hope 
of the Noldor lieth in the West, and cometh from the Sea.’ But Turgon was 
become proud, and Gondolin as beautiful as a memory of Elven Tirion, and he 
trusted still in its secret and impregnable strength, though even a Vala should 
gainsay it; and after the Nirnaeth Arnoediad the people of that city desired never 
again to mingle in the woes of Elves and Men without, nor to return through 
dread and danger into the West. Shut behind their pathless and enchanted hills 
they suffered none to enter, though he fled from Morgoth hate-pursued; and 
tidings of the lands beyond came to them faint and far, and they heeded them 
little. The spies of Angband sought for them in vain; and their dwelling was as a 
rumour, and a secret that none could find. Maeglin spoke ever against Tuor in 
the councils of the King, and his words seemed the more weighty in that they 
went with Turgon’s heart; and at the last he rejected the bidding of Ulmo and 
refused his counsel. But in the warning of the Vala he heard again the words that 
were spoken before the departing Noldor on the coast of Araman long ago; and 
the fear of treason was wakened in Turgon’s heart. Therefore in that time the 
very entrance to the hidden door in the Encircling Mountains was caused to be 
blocked up; and thereafter none went ever forth from Gondolin on any errand of 
peace or war, while that city stood. Tidings were brought by Thorondor Lord of 
Eagles of the fall of Nargothrond, and after of the slaying of Thingol and of Dior 
his heir, and of the ruin of Doriath; but Turgon shut his ear to word of the woes 
without, and vowed to march never at the side of any son of Feanor; and his 
people he forbade ever to pass the leaguer of the hills. 

And Tuor remained in Gondolin, for its bliss and its beauty and the wisdom of 
its people held him enthralled; and he became mighty in stature and in mind, and 
learned deeply of the lore of the exiled Elves. Then the heart of Idril was turned 
to him, and his to her; and Maeglin’s secret hatred grew ever greater, for he 
desired above all things to possess her, the only heir of the King of Gondolin. 
But so high did Tuor stand in the favour of the King that when he had dwelt 
there for seven years Turgon did not refuse him even the hand of his daughter; 
for though he would not heed the bidding of Ulmo, he perceived that the fate of 
the Noldor was wound with the one whom Ulmo had sent; and he did not forget 
the words that Huor spoke to him before the host of Gondolin departed from the 
Battle of Unnumbered Tears. 

Then there was made a great and joyful feast, for Tuor had won the hearts of 



all that people, save only of Maeglin and his secret following; and thus there 
came to pass the second union of Elves and Men. 




In the spring of the year after was born in Gondolin Earendil Halfelven, the 
son of Tuor and Idril Celebrindal; and that was five hundred years and three 
since the coming of the Noldor to Middle-earth. Of surpassing beauty was 
Earendil, for a light was in his face as the light of heaven, and he had the beauty 
and the wisdom of the Eldar and the strength and hardihood of the Men of old; 
and the Sea spoke ever in his ear and heart, even as with Tuor his father. 

Then the days of Gondolin were yet full of joy and peace; and none knew that 
the region wherein the Hidden Kingdom lay had been at last revealed to Morgoth 
by the cries of Hurin, when standing in the wilderness beyond the Encircling 
Mountains and finding no entrance he called on Turgon in despair. Thereafter the 
thought of Morgoth was bent unceasing on the mountainous land between Anach 
and the upper waters of Sirion, whither his servants had never passed; yet still no 
spy or creature out of Angband could come there because of the vigilance of the 
eagles, and Morgoth was thwarted in the fulfilment of his designs. But Idril 
Celebrindal was wise and far-seeing, and her heart misgave her, and foreboding 
crept upon her spirit as a cloud. Therefore in that time she let prepare a secret 
way, that should lead down from the city and passing out beneath the surface of 
the plain issue far beyond the walls, northward of Amon Gwareth; and she 
contrived it that the work was known but to few, and no whisper of it came to 
Maeglin’s ears. 

Now on a time, when Earendil was yet young, Maeglin was lost. For he, as 
has been told, loved mining and quarrying after metals above all other craft; and 
he was master and leader of the Elves who worked in the mountains distant from 
the city, seeking after metals for their smithying of things both of peace and war. 
But often Maeglin went with few of his folk beyond the leaguer of the hills, and 
the King knew not that his bidding was defied; and thus it came to pass, as fate 
willed, that Maeglin was taken prisoner by Ores, and brought to Angband. 
Maeglin was no weakling or craven, but the torment wherewith he was 
threatened cowed his spirit, and he purchased his life and freedom by revealing 
to Morgoth the very place of Gondolin and the ways whereby it might be found 
and assailed. Great indeed was the joy of Morgoth, and to Maeglin he promised 
the lordship of Gondolin as his vassal, and the possession of Idril Celebrindal, 
when the city should be taken; and indeed desire for Idril and hatred for Tuor led 
Maeglin the easier to his treachery, most infamous in all the histories of the Elder 
Days. But Morgoth sent him back to Gondolin, lest any should suspect the 
betrayal, and so that Maeglin should aid the assault from within, when the hour 



came; and he abode in the halls of the King with smiling face and evil in his 
heart, while the darkness gathered ever deeper upon Idril. 

At last, in the year when Earendil was seven years old, Morgoth was ready, 
and he loosed upon Gondolin his Balrogs, and his Ores, and his wolves; and with 
them came dragons of the brood of Glaurung, and they were become now many 
and terrible. The host of Morgoth came over the northern hills where the height 
was greatest and the watch least vigilant, and it came at night upon a time of 
festival, when all the people of Gondolin were upon the walls to await the rising 
sun, and sing their songs at its uplifting; for the morrow was the great feast that 
they named the Gates of Summer. But the red light mounted the hills in the north 
and not in the east; and there was no stay in the advance of the foe until they 
were beneath the very walls of Gondolin, and the city was beleaguered without 
hope. Of the deeds of desperate valour there done, by the chieftains of the noble 
houses and their warriors, and not least by Tuor, much is told in The Fall of 
Gondolin : of the battle of Ecthelion of the Fountain with Gothmog Lord of 
Balrogs in the very square of the King, where each slew the other, and of the 
defence of the tower of Turgon by the people of his household, until the tower 
was overthrown; and mighty was its fall and the fall of Turgon in its ruin. 

Tuor sought to rescue Idril from the sack of the city, but Maeglin had laid 
hands on her, and on Earendil; and Tuor fought with Maeglin on the walls, and 
cast him far out, and his body as it fell smote the rocky slopes of Amon Gwareth 
thrice ere it pitched into the flames below. Then Tuor and Idril led such remnants 
of the people of Gondolin as they could gather in the confusion of the burning 
down the secret way which Idril had prepared; and of that passage the captains 
of Angband knew nothing, and thought not that any fugitives would take a path 
towards the north and the highest parts of the mountains and the nighest to 
Angband. The fume of the burning, and the steam of the fair fountains of 
Gondolin withering in the flame of the dragons of the north, fell upon the vale of 
Tumladen in mournful mists; and thus was the escape of Tuor and his company 
aided, for there was still a long and open road to follow from the tunnel’s mouth 
to the foothills of the mountains. Nonetheless they came thither, and beyond 
hope they climbed, in woe and misery, for the high places were cold and terrible, 
and they had among them many that were wounded, and women and children. 










There was a dreadful pass, Cirith Thoronath it was named, the Eagles’ Cleft, 
where beneath the shadow of the highest peaks a narrow path wound its way; on 
the right hand it was walled by a precipice, and on the left a dreadful fall leapt 
into emptiness. Along that narrow way their march was strung, when they were 
ambushed by Ores, for Morgoth had set watchers all about the encircling hills; 
and a Balrog was with them. Then dreadful was their plight, and hardly would 
they have been saved by the valour of yellow-haired Glorfindel, chief of the 
House of the Golden Flower of Gondolin, had not Thorondor come timely to 
their aid. 

Many are the songs that have been sung of the duel of Glorfindel with the 
Balrog upon a pinnacle of rock in that high place; and both fell to ruin in the 
abyss. But the eagles coming stooped upon the Ores, and drove them shrieking 
back; and all were slain or cast into the deeps, so that rumour of the escape from 
Gondolin came not until long after to Morgoth’s ears. Then Thorondor bore up 
Glorfindel’s body out of the abyss, and they buried him in a mound of stones 
beside the pass; and a green turf came there, and yellow flowers bloomed upon it 
amid the barrenness of stone, until the world was changed. 

Thus led by Tuor son of Huor the remnant of Gondolin passed over the 
mountains, and came down into the Vale of Sirion; and fleeing southward by 
weary and dangerous marches they came at length to Nan-tathren, the Land of 
Willows, for the power of Ulmo yet ran in the great river, and it was about them. 
There they rested a while, and were healed of their hurts and weariness; but their 
sorrow could not be healed. And they made a feast in memory of Gondolin and 
of the Elves that had perished there, the maidens, and the wives, and the warriors 
of the King; and for Glorfindel the beloved many were the songs they sang, 
under the willows of Nan-tathren in the waning of the year. There Tuor made a 
song for Earendil his son, concerning the coming of Ulmo the Lord of Waters to 
the shores of Nevrast aforetime; and the sea-longing woke in his heart, and in his 
son’s also. Therefore Idril and Tuor departed from Nan-tathren, and went 
southwards down the river to the sea; and they dwelt there by the mouths of 
Sirion, and joined their people to the company of Elwing Dior’s daughter, that 
had fled thither but a little while before. And when the tidings came to Balar of 
the fall of Gondolin and the death of Turgon, Ereinion Gil-galad son of Fingon 
was named High King of the Noldor in Middle-earth. 

But Morgoth thought that his triumph was fulfilled, recking little of the sons 
of Feanor, and of their oath, which had harmed him never and turned always to 
his mightiest aid; and in his black thought he laughed, regretting not the one 



Silmaril that he had lost, for by it as he deemed the last shred of the people of the 
Eldar should vanish from Middle-earth and trouble it no more. If he knew of the 
dwelling by the waters of Sirion, he gave no sign, biding his time, and waiting 
upon the working of oath and lie. Yet by Sirion and the sea there grew up an 
Elven-folk, the gleanings of Doriath and Gondolin; and from Balar the mariners 
of Cirdan came among them, and they took to the waves and the building of 
ships, dwelling ever nigh to the coasts of Arvernien, under the shadow of Ulmo’s 
hand. 

And it is said that in that time Ulmo came to Valinor out of the deep waters, 
and spoke there to the Valar of the need of the Elves; and he called on them to 
forgive them, and rescue them from the overmastering might of Morgoth, and 
win back the Silmarils, wherein alone now bloomed the light of the Days of 
Bliss when the Two Trees still shone in Valinor. But Manwe moved not; and of 
the counsels of his heart what tale shall tell? The wise have said that the hour 
was not yet come, and that only one speaking in person for the cause of both 
Elves and Men, pleading for pardon on their mis-deeds and pity on their woes, 
might move the counsels of the Powers; and the oath of Feanor perhaps even 
Manwe could not loose, until it found its end, and the sons of Feanor 
relinquished the Silmarils, upon which they had laid their ruthless claim. For the 
light which lit the Silmarils the Valar themselves had made. 















In those days Tuor felt old age creep upon him, and ever a longing for the 
deeps of the Sea grew stronger in his heart. Therefore he built a great ship, and 
he named it Earrame, which is Sea-Wing; and with Idril Celebrindal he set sail 
into the sunset and the West, and came no more into any tale or song. But in after 
days it was sung that Tuor alone of mortal Men was numbered among the elder 
race, and was joined with the Noldor, whom he loved; and his fate is sundered 
from the fate of Men. 










CHAPTER 24 



OF THE VOYAGE OF EARENDIL AND THE WAR OF 

WRATH 


Bright Earendil was then lord of the people that dwelt nigh to Sirion’s mouths; 
and he took to wife Elwing the fair, and she bore to him Elrond and Elros, who 
are called the Half-elven. Yet Earendil could not rest, and his voyages about the 
shores of the Hither Lands eased not his unquiet. Two purposes grew in his 
heart, blended as one in longing for the wide Sea: he sought to sail thereon, 
seeking after Tuor and Idril who returned not; and he thought to find perhaps the 
last shore, and bring ere he died the message of Elves and Men to the Valar in 
the West, that should move their hearts to pity for the sorrows of Middle-earth. 

Now Earendil became fast in friendship with Cirdan the Shipwright, who 
dwelt on the Isle of Balar with those of his people who escaped from the sack of 
the Havens of Brithombar and Eglarest. With the aid of Cirdan Earendil built 
Vingilot, the Foam-flower, fairest of the ships of song; golden were its oars and 
white its timbers, hewn in the birchwoods of Nimbrethil, and its sails were as the 
argent moon. In the Lay of Earendil is many a thing sung of his adventures in the 
deep and in lands untrodden, and in many seas and in many isles; but Elwing 
was not with him, and she sat in sorrow by the mouths of Sirion. 

Earendil found not Tuor nor Idril, nor came he ever on that journey to the 
shores of Valinor, defeated by shadows and enchantment, driven by repelling 
winds, until in longing for Elwing he turned homeward towards the coast of 
Beleriand. And his heart bade him haste, for a sudden fear had fallen on him out 
of dreams; and the winds that before he had striven with might not now bear him 
back as swift as his desire. 

Now when first the tidings came to Maedhros that Elwing yet lived, and dwelt 
in possession of the Silmaril by the mouths of Sirion, he repenting of the deeds 
in Doriath withheld his hand. But in time the knowledge of their oath unfulfilled 
returned to torment him and his brothers, and gathering from their wandering 
hunting-paths they sent messages to the Havens of friendship and yet of stern 
demand. Then Elwing and the people of Sirion would not yield the jewel which 
Beren had won and Luthien had worn, and for which Dior the fair was slain; and 
least of all while Earendil their lord was on the sea, for it seemed to them that in 
the Silmaril lay the healing and the blessing that had come upon their houses and 
their ships. And so there came to pass the last and cruellest of the slayings of Elf 
by Elf; and that was the third of the great wrongs achieved by the accursed oath. 

For the sons of Feanor that yet lived came down suddenly upon the exiles of 
Gondolin and the remnant of Doriath, and destroyed them. In that battle some of 




their people stood aside, and some few rebelled and were slain upon the other 
part aiding Elwing against their own lords (for such was the sorrow and 
confusion in the hearts of the Eldar in those days); but Maedhros and Maglor 
won the day, though they alone remained thereafter of the sons of Feanor, for 
both Amrod and Amras were slain. Too late the ships of Cirdan and Gil-galad 
the High King came hasting to the aid of the Elves of Sirion; and Elwing was 
gone, and her sons. Then such few of that people as did not perish in the assault 
joined themselves to Gil-galad, and went with him to Balar; and they told that 
Elros and Elrond were taken captive, but Elwing with the Silmaril upon her 
breast had cast herself into the sea. 

Thus Maedhros and Maglor gained not the jewel; but it was not lost. For 
Ulmo bore up Elwing out of the waves, and he gave her the likeness of a great 
white bird, and upon her breast there shone as a star the Silmaril, as she flew 
over the water to seek Earendil her beloved. On a time of night Earendil at the 
helm of his ship saw her come towards him, as a white cloud exceeding swift 
beneath the moon, as a star over the sea moving in strange course, a pale flame 
on wings of storm. And it is sung that she fell from the air upon the timbers of 
Vingilot, in a swoon, nigh unto death for the urgency of her speed, and Earendil 
took her to his bosom; but in the morning with marvelling eyes he beheld his 
wife in her own form beside him with her hair upon his face, and she slept. 

Great was the sorrow of Earendil and Elwing for the ruin of the havens of 
Sirion, and the captivity of their sons, and they feared that they would be slain; 
but it was not so. For Maglor took pity upon Elros and Elrond, and he cherished 
them, and love grew after between them, as little might be thought; but Maglor’s 
heart was sick and weary with the burden of the dreadful oath. 

Yet Earendil saw now no hope left in the lands of Middle-earth, and he turned 
again in despair and came not home, but sought back once more to Valinor with 
Elwing at his side. He stood now most often at the prow of Vingilot, and the 
Silmaril was bound upon his brow; and ever its light grew greater as they drew 
into the West. And the wise have said that it was by reason of the power of that 
holy jewel that they came in time to waters that no vessels save those of the 
Teleri had known; and they came to the Enchanted Isles and escaped their 
enchantment; and they came into the Shadowy Seas and passed their shadows, 
and they looked upon Tol Eressea the Lonely Isle, but tarried not; and at the last 
they cast anchor in the Bay of Eldamar, and the Teleri saw the coming of that 
ship out of the East and they were amazed, gazing from afar upon the light of the 
Silmaril, and it was very great. Then Earendil, first of living Men, landed on the 
immortal shores; and he spoke there to Elwing and to those that were with him, 
and they were three mariners who had sailed all the seas beside him: Falathar, 



Erellont, and Aerandir were their names. And Earendil said to them: ‘Here none 
but myself shall set foot, lest you fall under the wrath of the Valar. But that peril 
I will take on myself alone, for the sake of the Two Kindreds.’ 

But Elwing answered: ‘Then would our paths be sundered for ever; but all thy 
perils I will take on myself also.’ And she leaped into the white foam and ran 
towards him; but Earendil was sorrowful, for he feared the anger of the Lords of 
the West upon any of Middle-earth that should dare to pass the leaguer of Aman. 
And there they bade farewell to the companions of their voyage, and were taken 
from them for ever. 

Then Earendil said to Elwing: ‘Await me here; for one only may bring the 
message that it is my fate to bear.’ And he went up alone into the land, and came 
into the Calacirya, and it seemed to him empty and silent; for even as Morgoth 
and Ungoliant came in ages past, so now Earendil had come at a time of festival, 
and wellnigh all the Elvenfolk were gone to Valimar, or were gathered in the 
halls of Manwe upon Taniquetil, and few were left to keep watch upon the walls 
of Tirion. 

But some there were who saw him from afar, and the great light that he bore; 
and they went in haste to Valimar. But Earendil climbed the green hill of Tuna 
and found it bare; and he entered into the streets of Tirion, and they were empty; 
and his heart was heavy, for he feared that some evil had come even to the 
Blessed Realm. He walked in the deserted ways of Tirion, and the dust upon his 
raiment and his shoes was a dust of diamonds, and he shone and glistened as he 
climbed the long white stairs. And he called aloud in many tongues, both of 
Elves and Men, but there were none to answer him. Therefore he turned back at 
last towards the sea; but even as he took the shoreward road one stood upon the 
hill and called to him in a great voice, crying: 

‘Hail Earendil, of mariners most renowned, the looked for that cometh at 
unawares, the longed for that cometh beyond hope! Hail Earendil, bearer of light 
before the Sun and Moon! Splendour of the Children of Earth, star in the 
darkness, jewel in the sunset, radiant in the morning!’ 

That voice was the voice of Eonwe, herald of Manwe, and he came from 
Valimar, and summoned Earendil to come before the Powers of Arda. And 
Earendil went into Valinor and to the halls of Valimar, and never again set foot 
upon the lands of Men. Then the Valar took counsel together, and they 
summoned Ulmo from the deeps of the sea; and Earendil stood before their 
faces, and delivered the errand of the Two Kindreds. Pardon he asked for the 
Noldor and pity for their great sorrows, and mercy upon Men and Elves and 
succour in their need. And his prayer was granted. 

It is told among the Elves that after Earendil had departed, seeking Elwing his 



wife, Mandos spoke concerning his fate; and he said: ‘Shall mortal Man step 
living upon the undying lands, and yet live?’ But Ulmo said: ‘For this he was 
born into the world. And say unto me: whether is he Earendil Tuor’s son of the 
line of Hador, or the son of Idril, Turgon’s daughter, of the Elven-house of 
Finwe?’ And Mandos answered: ‘Equally the Noldor, who went wilfully into 
exile, may not return hither.’ 

But when all was spoken, Manwe gave judgement, and he said: ‘In this matter 
the power of doom is given to me. The peril that he ventured for love of the Two 
Kindreds shall not fall upon Earendil, nor shall it fall upon Elwing his wife, who 
entered into peril for love of him; but they shall not walk again ever among 
Elves or Men in the Outer Lands. And this is my decree concerning them: to 
Earendil and to Elwing, and to their sons, shall be given leave each to choose 
freely to which kindred their fates shall be joined, and under which kindred they 
shall be judged.’ 

Now when Earendil was long time gone Elwing became lonely and afraid; and 
wandering by the margin of the sea she came near to Alqualonde, where lay the 
Telerin fleets. There the Teleri befriended her, and they listened to her tales of 
Doriath and Gondolin and the griefs of Beleriand, and they were filled with pity 
and wonder; and there Earendil returning found her, at the Haven of the Swans. 
But ere long they were summoned to Valimar; and there the decree of the Elder 
King was declared to them. 

Then Earendil said to Elwing: ‘Choose thou, for now I am weary of the 
world.’ And Elwing chose to be judged among the Firstborn Children of Iluvatar, 
because of Luthien; and for her sake Earendil chose alike, though his heart was 
rather with the kindred of Men and the people of his father. Then at the bidding 
of the Valar Eonwe went to the shore of Aman, where the companions of 
Earendil still remained, awaiting tidings; and he took a boat, and the three 
mariners were set therein, and the Valar drove them away into the East with a 
great wind. But they took Vingilot, and hallowed it, and bore it away through 
Valinor to the uttermost rim of the world; and there it passed through the Door of 
Night and was lifted up even into the oceans of heaven. 

Now fair and marvellous was that vessel made, and it was filled with a 
wavering flame, pure and bright; and Earendil the Mariner sat at the helm, 
glistening with dust of elven-gems, and the Silmaril was bound upon his brow. 
Far he journeyed in that ship, even into the starless voids; but most often was he 
seen at morning or at evening, glimmering in sunrise or sunset, as he came back 
to Valinor from voyages beyond the confines of the world. 

On those journeys Elwing did not go, for she might not endure the cold and 
the pathless voids, and she loved rather the earth and the sweet winds that blow 



on sea and hill. Therefore there was built for her a white tower northward upon 
the borders of the Sundering Seas; and thither at times all the sea-birds of the 
earth repaired. And it is said that Elwing learned the tongues of birds, who 
herself had once worn their shape; and they taught her the craft of flight, and her 
wings were of white and silver-grey. And at times, when Earendil returning drew 
near again to Arda, she would fly to meet him, even as she had flown long ago, 
when she was rescued from the sea. Then the far-sighted among the Elves that 
dwelt in the Lonely Isle would see her like a white bird, shining, rose-stained in 
the sunset, as she soared in joy to greet the coming of Vingilot to haven. 

Now when first Vingilot was set to sail in the seas of heaven, it rose unlooked 
for, glittering and bright; and the people of Middle-earth beheld it from afar and 
wondered, and they took it for a sign, and called it Gil-Estel, the Star of High 
Hope. And when this new star was seen at evening, Maedhros spoke to Maglor 
his brother, and he said: 'Surely that is a Silmaril that shines now in the West ? 5 

And Maglor answered: ‘If it be truly the Silmaril which we saw cast into the 
sea that rises again by the power of the Valar, then let us be glad; for its glory is 
seen now by many, and is yet secure from all evil.’ Then the Elves looked up, 
and despaired no longer; but Morgoth was filled with doubt. 

Yet it is said that Morgoth looked not for the assault that came upon him from 
the West; for so great was his pride become that he deemed that none would ever 
again come with open war against him. Moreover he thought that he had for ever 
estranged the Noldor from the Lords of the West, and that content in their 
blissful realm the Valar would heed no more his kingdom in the world without; 
for to him that is pitiless the deeds of pity are ever strange and beyond 
reckoning. But the host of the Valar prepared for battle; and beneath their white 
banners marched the Vanyar, the people of Ingwe, and those also of the Noldor 
who never departed from Valinor, whose leader was Finarfin the son of Finwe. 
Few of the Teleri were willing to go forth to war, for they remembered the 
slaying at the Swanhaven, and the rape of their ships; but they hearkened to 
Elwing, who was the daughter of Dior Eluchil and come of their own kindred, 
and they sent mariners enough to sail the ships that bore the host of Valinor east 
over the sea. Yet they stayed aboard their vessels, and none of them set foot upon 
the Hither Lands. 


Of the march of the host of the Valar to the north of Middle-earth little is said 
in any tale; for among them went none of those Elves who had dwelt and 
suffered in the Hither Lands, and who made the histories of those days that still 
are known; and tidings of these things they only learned long afterwards from 



their kinsfolk in Aman. But at the last the might of Valinor came up out of the 
West, and the challenge of the trumpets of Eonwe filled the sky; and Beleriand 
was ablaze with the glory of their arms, for the host of the Valar were arrayed in 
forms young and fair and terrible, and the mountains rang beneath their feet. 

The meeting of the hosts of the West and of the North is named the Great 
Battle, and the War of Wrath. There was marshalled the whole power of the 
Throne of Morgoth, and it had become great beyond count, so that Anfauglith 
could not contain it; and all the North was aflame with war. 

But it availed him not. The Balrogs were destroyed, save some few that fled 
and hid themselves in caverns inaccessible at the roots of the earth; and the 
uncounted legions of the Ores perished like straw in a great fire, or were swept 
like shrivelled leaves before a burning wind. Few remained to trouble the world 
for long years after. And such few as were left of the three houses of the Elf- 
friends, Fathers of Men, fought upon the part of the Valar; and they were 
avenged in those days for Baragund and Barahir, Galdor and Gundor, Huor and 
Hurin, and many others of their lords. But a great part of the sons of Men, 
whether of the people of Uldor or others new-come out of the east, marched with 
the Enemy; and the Elves do not forget it. 

Then, seeing that his hosts were overthrown and his power dispersed, Morgoth 
quailed, and he dared not to come forth himself. But he loosed upon his foes the 
last desperate assault that he had prepared, and out of the pits of Angband there 
issued the winged dragons, that had not before been seen; and so sudden and 
minous was the onset of that dreadful fleet that the host of the Valar was driven 
back, for the coming of the dragons was with great thunder, and lightning, and a 
tempest of fire. 

But Earendil came, shining with white flame, and about Vingilot were 
gathered all the great birds of heaven and Thorondor was their captain, and there 
was battle in the air all the day and through a dark night of doubt. Before the 
rising of the sun Earendil slew Ancalagon the Black, the mightiest of the dragon- 
host, and cast him from the sky; and he fell upon the towers of Thangorodrim, 
and they were broken in his ruin. Then the sun rose, and the host of the Valar 
prevailed, and well-nigh all the dragons were destroyed; and all the pits of 
Morgoth were broken and unroofed, and the might of the Valar descended into 
the deeps of the earth. There Morgoth stood at last at bay, and yet unvaliant. He 
fled into the deepest of his mines, and sued for peace and pardon; but his feet 
were hewn from under him, and he was hurled upon his face. Then he was 
bound with the chain Angainor which he had worn aforetime, and his iron crown 
they beat into a collar for his neck, and his head was bowed upon his knees. And 
the two Silmarils which remained to Morgoth were taken from his crown, and 



they shone unsul-lied beneath the sky; and Eonwe took them, and guarded them. 

Thus an end was made of the power of Angband in the North, and the evil 
realm was brought to naught; and out of the deep prisons a multitude of slaves 
came forth beyond all hope into the light of day, and they looked upon a world 
that was changed. For so great was the fury of those adversaries that the northern 
regions of the western world were rent asunder, and the sea roared in through 
many chasms, and there was confusion and great noise; and rivers perished or 
found new paths, and the valleys were upheaved and the hills trod down; and 
Sirion was no more. 

Then Eonwe as herald of the Elder King summoned the Elves of Beleriand to 
depart from Middle-earth. But Maedhros and Maglor would not hearken, and 
they prepared, though now with weariness and loathing, to attempt in despair the 
fulfilment of their oath; for they would have given battle for the Silmarils, were 
they withheld, even against the victorious host of Valinor, even though they 
stood alone against all the world. And they sent a message therefore to Eonwe, 
bidding him yield up now those jewels which of old Feanor their father made 
and Morgoth stole from him. 

But Eonwe answered that the right to the work of their father, which the sons 
of Feanor formerly possessed, had now perished, because of their many and 
merciless deeds, being blinded by their oath, and most of all because of their 
slaying of Dior and the assault upon the Havens. The light of the Silmarils 
should go now into the West, whence it came in the beginning; and to Valinor 
must Maedhros and Maglor return, and there abide the judgement of the Valar, 
by whose decree alone would Eonwe yield the jewels from his charge. Then 
Maglor desired indeed to submit, for his heart was sorrowful, and he said: The 
oath says not that we may not bide our time, and it may be that in Valinor all 
shall be forgiven and forgot, and we shall come into our own in peace.’ 

But Maedhros answered that if they returned to Aman but the favour of the 
Valar were withheld from them, then their oath would still remain, but its 
fulfilment be beyond all hope; and he said: ‘Who can tell to what dreadful doom 
we shall come, if we disobey the Powers in their own land, or purpose ever to 
bring war again into their holy realm?’ 

Yet Maglor still held back, saying: ‘If Manwe and Varda themselves deny the 
fulfilment of an oath to which we named them in witness, is it not made void?’ 

And Maedhros answered: ‘But how shall our voices reach to Iluvatar beyond 
the Circles of the World? And by Iluvatar we swore in our madness, and called 
the Everlasting Darkness upon us, if we kept not our word. Who shall release 
us?’ 

‘If none can release us,’ said Maglor, ‘then indeed the Everlasting Darkness 



shall be our lot, whether we keep our oath or break it; but less evil shall we do in 
the breaking.’ 

Yet he yielded at last to the will of Maedhros, and they took counsel together 
how they should lay hands on the Silmarils. And they disguised themselves, and 
came in the night to the camp of Eonwe, and crept into the place where the 
Silmarils were guarded; and they slew the guards, and laid hands on the jewels. 
Then all the camp was raised against them, and they prepared to die, defending 
themselves until the last. But Eonwe would not permit the slaying of the sons of 
Feanor; and departing unfought they fled far away. Each of them took to himself 
a Silmaril, for they said: ‘Since one is lost to us, and but two remain, and we two 
alone of our brothers, so is it plain that fate would have us share the heirlooms of 
our father.’ 

But the jewel burned the hand of Maedhros in pain unbearable; and he 
perceived that it was as Eonwe had said, and that his right thereto had become 
void, and that the oath was vain. And being in anguish and despair he cast 
himself into a gaping chasm filled with fire, and so ended; and the Silmaril that 
he bore was taken into the bosom of the Earth. 

And it is told of Maglor that he could not endure the pain with which the 
Silmaril tormented him; and he cast it at last into the Sea, and thereafter he 
wandered ever upon the shores, singing in pain and regret beside the waves. For 
Maglor was mighty among the singers of old, named only after Daeron of 
Doriath; but he came never back among the people of the Elves. And thus it 
came to pass that the Silmarils found their long homes: one in the airs of heaven, 
and one in the fires of the heart of the world, and one in the deep waters. 


In those days there was a great building of ships upon the shores of the 
Western Sea; and thence in many a fleet the Eldar set sail into the West, and 
came never back to the lands of weeping and of war. And the Vanyar returned 
beneath their white banners, and were borne in triumph to Valinor; but their joy 
in victory was diminished, for they returned without the Silmarils from 
Morgoth’s crown, and they knew that those jewels could not be found or brought 
together again unless the world be broken and remade. 

And when they came into the West the Elves of Beleriand dwelt upon Tol 
Eressea, the Lonely Isle, that looks both west and east; whence they might come 
even to Valinor. They were admitted again to the love of Manwe and the pardon 
of the Valar; and the Teleri forgave their ancient grief, and the curse was laid to 
rest. 

Yet not all the Eldalie were willing to forsake the Hither Lands where they had 



long suffered and long dwelt; and some lingered many an age in Middle-earth. 
Among those were Cardan the Shipwright, and Celeborn of Doriath, with 
Galadriel his wife, who alone remained of those who led the Noldor to exile in 
Beleriand. In Middle-earth dwelt also Gil-galad the High King, and with him 
was Elrond Half-elven, who chose, as was granted to him, to be numbered 
among the Eldar; but Elros his brother chose to abide with Men. And from these 
brethren alone has come among Men the blood of the Firstborn and a strain of 
the spirits divine that were before Arda; for they were the sons of Elwing, Dior’s 
daughter, Luthien’s son, child of Thingol and Melian; and Earendil their father 
was the son of Idril Celebrindal, Turgon’s daughter of Gondolin. 

But Morgoth himself the Valar thrust through the Door of Night beyond the 
Walls of the World, into the Timeless Void; and a guard is set for ever on those 
walls, and Earendil keeps watch upon the ramparts of the sky. Yet the lies that 
Melkor, the mighty and accursed, Morgoth Bauglir, the Power of Terror and of 
Hate, sowed in the hearts of Elves and Men are a seed that does not die and 
cannot be destroyed; and ever and anon it sprouts anew, and will bear dark fruit 
even unto the latest days. 





Here ends the SILMARILLION. If it has passed from the high and the 
beautiful to darkness and ruin, that was of old the fate of Arda Marred; and 
if any change shall come and the Marring be amended, Manwe and Varda 
may know; but they have not revealed it, and it is not declared in the dooms 
of Mandos. 



AKALLABETH 



AKAT.TABF.TH 


The Downfall of Numenor 

It is said by the Eldar that Men came into the world in the time of the Shadow of 
Morgoth, and they fell swiftly under his dominion; for he sent his emissaries 
among them, and they listened to his evil and cunning words, and they 
worshipped the Darkness and yet feared it. But there were some that turned from 
evil and left the lands of their kindred, and wandered ever westward; for they 
had heard a rumour that in the West there was a light which the Shadow could 
not dim. The servants of Morgoth pursued them with hatred, and their ways were 
long and hard; yet they came at last to the lands that look upon the Sea, and they 
entered Beleriand in the days of the War of the Jewels. The Edain these were 
named in the Sindarin tongue; and they became friends and allies of the Eldar, 
and did deeds of great valour in the war against Morgoth. 

Of them was sprung, upon the side of his fathers, Bright Earendil; and in the 
Lay of Earendil it is told how at the last, when the victory of Morgoth was 
almost complete, he built his ship Vingilot, that Men called Rothinzil, and 
voyaged upon the unsailed seas, seeking ever for Valinor; for he desired to speak 
before the Powers on behalf of the Two Kindreds, that the Valar might have pity 
on them and send them help in their uttermost need. Therefore by Elves and Men 
he is called Earendil the Blessed, for he achieved his quest after long labours and 
many perils, and from Valinor there came the host of the Lords of the West. But 
Earendil came never back to the lands that he had loved. 

In the Great Battle when at last Morgoth was overthrown and Thangorodrim 
was broken, the Edain alone of the kindreds of Men fought for the Valar, 
whereas many others fought for Morgoth. And after the victory of the Lords of 
the West those of the evil Men who were not destroyed fled back into the east, 
where many of their race were still wandering in the unharvested lands, wild and 
lawless, refusing alike the summons of the Valar and of Morgoth. And the evil 
Men came among them, and cast over them a shadow of fear, and they took them 
for kings. Then the Valar forsook for a time the Men of Middle-earth who had 
refused their summons and had taken the friends of Morgoth to be their masters; 
and Men dwelt in darkness and were troubled by many evil things that Morgoth 
had devised in the days of his dominion: demons, and dragons, and misshapen 



beasts, and the unclean Ores that are mockeries of the Children of Iluvatar. And 
the lot of Men was unhappy. 

But Manwe put forth Morgoth and shut him beyond the World in the Void that 
is without; and he cannot himself return again into the World, present and 
visible, while the Lords of the West are still enthroned. Yet the seeds that he had 
planted still grew and sprouted, bearing evil fruit, if any would tend them. For 
his will remained and guided his servants, moving them ever to thwart the will 
of the Valar and to destroy those that obeyed them. This the Lords of the West 
knew full well. When therefore Morgoth had been thrust forth, they held council 
concerning the ages that should come after. The Eldar they summoned to return 
into the West, and those that hearkened to the summons dwelt in the Isle of 
Eressea; and there is in that land a haven that is named Avallone, for it is of all 
cities the nearest to Valinor, and the tower of Avallone is the first sight that the 
mariner beholds when at last he draws nigh to the Undying Lands over the 
leagues of the Sea. To the Fathers of Men of the three faithful houses rich reward 
also was given. Eonwe came among them and taught them; and they were given 
wisdom and power and life more enduring than any others of mortal race have 
possessed. A land was made for the Edain to dwell in, neither part of Middle- 
earth nor of Valinor, for it was sundered from either by a wide sea; yet it was 
nearer to Valinor. It was raised by Osse out of the depths of the Great Water, and 
it was established by Aule and enriched by Yavanna; and the Eldar brought 
thither flowers and fountains out of Tol Eressea. That land the Valar called 
Andor, the Land of Gift; and the Star of Earendil shone bright in the West as a 
token that all was made ready, and as a guide over the sea; and Men marvelled to 
see that silver flame in the paths of the Sun. 

Then the Edain set sail upon the deep waters, following the Star; and the Valar 
laid a peace upon the sea for many days, and sent sunlight and a sailing wind, so 
that the waters glittered before the eyes of the Edain like rippling glass, and the 
foam flew like snow before the stems of their ships. But so bright was Rothinzil 
that even at morning Men could see it glimmering in the West, and in the 
cloudless night it shone alone, for no other star could stand beside it. And setting 
their course towards it the Edain came at last over leagues of sea and saw afar 
the land that was prepared for them, Andor, the Land of Gift, shimmering in a 
golden haze. Then they went up out of the sea and found a country fair and 
fruitful, and they were glad. And they called that land Elenna, which is 
Starwards; but also Anadune, which is Westernesse, Numenore in the High 
Eldarin tongue. 

This was the beginning of that people that in the Grey-elven speech are called 
the Dunedain: the Numenoreans, Kings among Men. But they did not thus 



escape from the doom of death that Iluvatar had set upon all Mankind, and they 
were mortal still, though their years were long, and they knew no sickness, ere 
the shadow fell upon them. Therefore they grew wise and glorious, and in all 
things more like to the Firstborn than any other of the kindreds of Men; and they 
were tall, taller than the tallest of the sons of Middle-earth; and the light of their 
eyes was like the bright stars. But their numbers increased only slowly in the 
land, for though daughters and sons were born to them, fairer than their fathers, 
yet their children were few. 

Of old the chief city and haven of Numenor was in the midst of its western 
coasts, and it was called Andunie because it faced the sunset. But in the midst of 
the land was a mountain tall and steep, and it was named the Meneltarma, the 
Pillar of Heaven, and upon it was a high place that was hallowed to Eru Iluvatar, 
and it was open and unroofed, and no other temple or fane was there in the land 
of the Numenoreans. At the feet of the mountain were built the tombs of the 
Kings, and hard by upon a hill was Armenelos, fairest of cities, and there stood 
the tower and the citadel that was raised by Elros son of Earendil, whom the 
Valar appointed to be the first King of the Diinedain. 

Now Elros and Elrond his brother were descended from the Three Houses of 
the Edain, but in part also both from the Eldar and the Maiar; for Idril of 
Gondolin and Luthien daughter of Melian were their foremothers. The Valar 
indeed may not withdraw the gift of death, which comes to Men from Iluvatar, 
but in the matter of the Half-elven Iluvatar gave to them the judgement; and they 
judged that to the sons of Earendil should be given choice of their own destiny. 
And Elrond chose to remain with the Firstborn, and to him the life of the 
Firstborn was granted. But to Elros, who chose to be a king of Men, still a great 
span of years was allotted, many times that of the Men of Middle-earth; and all 
his line, the kings and lords of the royal house, had long life even according to 
the measure of the Numenoreans. But Elros lived five hundred years, and ruled 
the Numenoreans four hundred years and ten. 

Thus the years passed, and while Middle-earth went backward and light and 
wisdom faded, the Diinedain dwelt under the protection of the Valar and in the 
friendship of the Eldar, and they increased in stature both of mind and body. For 
though this people used still their own speech, their kings and lords knew and 
spoke also the Elven tongue, which they had learned in the days of their alliance, 
and thus they held converse still with the Eldar, whether of Eressea or of the 
westlands of Middle-earth. And the loremasters among them learned also the 
High Eldarin tongue of the Blessed Realm, in which much story and song was 
preserved from the begin- ning of the world; and they made letters and scrolls 
and books, and wrote in them many things of wisdom and wonder in the high 



tide of their realm, of which all is now forgot. So it came to pass that, beside 
their own names, all the lords of the Numenoreans had also Eldarin names; and 
the like with the cities and fair places that they founded in Numenor and on the 
shores of the Hither Lands. 

For the Dunedain became mighty in crafts, so that if they had had the mind 
they could easily have surpassed the evil kings of Middle-earth in the making of 
war and the forging of weapons; but they were become men of peace. Above all 
arts they nourished ship-building and sea-craft, and they became mariners whose 
like shall never be again since the world was diminished; and voyaging upon the 
wide seas was the chief feat and adventure of their hardy men in the gallant days 
of their youth. 

But the Lords of Valinor forbade them to sail so far westward that the coasts 
of Numenor could no longer be seen; and for long the Dunedain were content, 
though they did not fully understand the purpose of this ban. But the design of 
Manwe was that the Numenoreans should not be tempted to seek for the Blessed 
Realm, nor desire to overpass the limits set to their bliss, becoming enamoured 
of the immortality of the Valar and the Eldar and the lands where all things 
endure. 

For in those days Valinor still remained in the world visible, and there Iluvatar 
permitted the Valar to maintain upon Earth an abiding place, a memorial of that 
which might have been if Morgoth had not cast his shadow on the world. This 
the Numenoreans knew full well; and at times, when all the air was clear and the 
sun was in the east, they would look out and descry far off in the west a city 
white-shining on a distant shore, and a great harbour and a tower. For in those 
days the Numenoreans were far-sighted; yet even so it was only the keenest eyes 
among them that could see this vision, from the Meneltarma, maybe, or from 
some tall ship that lay off their western coast as far as it was lawful for them to 
go. For they did not dare to break the Ban of the Lords of the West. 

But the wise among them knew that this distant land was not indeed the 
Blessed Realm of Valinor, but was Avallone, the haven of the Eldar upon 
Eressea, easternmost of the Undying Lands. And thence at times the Firstborn 
still would come sailing to Numenor in oarless boats, as white birds flying from 
the sunset. And they brought to Numenor many gifts: birds of song, and fragrant 
flowers, and herbs of great virtue. And a seedling they brought of Celeborn, the 
White Tree that grew in the midst of Eressea; and that was in its turn a seedling 
of Galathilion the Tree of Tuna, the image of Telperion that Yavanna gave to the 
Eldar in the Blessed Realm. And the tree grew and blossomed in the courts of 
the King in Armenelos; Nimloth it was named, and flowered in the evening, and 
the shadows of night it filled with its fragrance. 



Thus it was that because of the Ban of the Valar the voyages of the Dunedain 
in those days went ever eastward and not westward, from the darkness of the 
North to the heats of the South, and beyond the South to the Nether Darkness; 
and they came even into the inner seas, and sailed about Middle-earth and 
glimpsed from their high prows the Gates of Morning in the East. And the 
Dunedain came at times to the shores of the Great Lands, and they took pity on 
the forsaken world of Middle-earth; and the Lords of Numenor set foot again 
upon the western shores in the Dark Years of Men, and none yet dared to 
withstand them. Lor most of the Men of that age that sat under the Shadow were 
now grown weak and fearful. And coming among them the Numenoreans taught 
them many things. Corn and wine they brought, and they instructed Men in the 
sowing of seed and the grinding of grain, in the hewing of wood and the shaping 
of stone, and in the ordering of their life, such as it might be in the lands of swift 
death and little bliss. 

Then the Men of Middle-earth were comforted, and here and there upon the 
western shores the houseless woods drew back, and Men shook off the yoke of 
the offspring of Morgoth, and unlearned their terror of the dark. And they 
revered the memory of the tall Sea-kings, and when they had departed they 
called them gods, hoping for their return; for at that time the Numenoreans dwelt 
never long in Middle-earth, nor made there as yet any habitation of their own. 
Eastward they must sail, but ever west their hearts returned. 

Now this yearning grew ever greater with the years; and the Numenoreans 
began to hunger for the undying city that they saw from afar, and the desire of 
everlasting life, to escape from death and the ending of delight, grew strong 
upon them; and ever as their power and glory grew greater their unquiet 
increased. Lor though the Valar had rewarded the Dunedain with long life, they 
could not take from them the weariness of the world that comes at last, and they 
died, even their kings of the seed of Earendil; and the span of their lives was 
brief in the eyes of the Eldar. Thus it was that a shadow fell upon them: in which 
maybe the will of Morgoth was at work that still moved in the world. And the 
Numenoreans began to murmur, at first in their hearts, and then in open words, 
against the doom of Men, and most of all against the Ban which forbade them to 
sail into the West. 

And they said among themselves: 'Why do the Lords of the West sit there in 
peace unending, while we must die and go we know not whither, leaving our 
home and all that we have made? And the Eldar die not, even those that rebelled 
against the Lords. And since we have mastered all seas, and no water is so wild 
or so wide that our ships cannot overcome it, why should we not go to Avallone 
and greet there our friends?’ 



And some there were who said: ‘Why should we not go even to Aman, and 
taste there, were it but for a day, the bliss of the Powers? Have we not become 
mighty among the people of Arda?’ 

The Eldar reported these words to the Valar, and Manwe was grieved, seeing a 
cloud gather on the noon-tide of Numenor. And he sent messengers to the 
Dunedain, who spoke earnestly to the King, and to all who would listen, 
concerning the fate and fashion of the world. 

‘The Doom of the World/ they said, ‘One alone can change who made it. And 
were you so to voyage that escaping all deceits and snares you came indeed to 
Aman, the Blessed Realm, little would it profit you. For it is not the land of 
Manwe that makes its people deathless, but the Deathless that dwell therein have 
hallowed the land; and there you would but wither and grow weary the sooner, 
as moths in a light too strong and steadfast.’ 

But the King said: ‘And does not Earendil, my forefather, live? Or is he not in 
the land of Aman?’ 

To which they answered: ‘You know that he has a fate apart, and was 
adjudged to the Firstborn who die not; yet this also is his doom that he can never 
return again to mortal lands. Whereas you and your people are not of the 
Firstborn, but are mortal Men as Iluvatar made you. Yet it seems that you desire 
now to have the good of both kindreds, to sail to Valinor when you will, and to 
return when you please to your homes. That cannot be. Nor can the Valar take 
away the gifts of Iluvatar. The Eldar, you say, are unpunished, and even those 
who rebelled do not die. Yet that is to them neither reward nor punishment, but 
the fulfilment of their being. They cannot escape, and are bound to this world, 
never to leave it so long as it lasts, for its life is theirs. And you are punished for 
the rebellion of Men, you say, in which you had small part, and so it is that you 
die. But that was not at first appointed for a punishment. Thus you escape, and 
leave the world, and are not bound to it, in hope or in weariness. Which of us 
therefore should envy the others?’ 

And the Numenoreans answered: ‘Why should we not envy the Valar, or even 
the least of the Deathless? For of us is required a blind trust, and a hope without 
assurance, knowing not what lies before us in a little while. And yet we also love 
the Earth and would not lose it.’ 

Then the Messengers said: ‘Indeed the mind of Iluvatar concerning you is not 
known to the Valar, and he has not revealed all things that are to come. But this 
we hold to be true, that your home is not here, neither in the Eand of Aman nor 
anywhere within the Circles of the World. And the Doom of Men, that they 
should depart, was at first a gift of Iluvatar. It became a grief to them only 
because coming under the shadow of Morgoth it seemed to them that they were 



surrounded by a great darkness, of which they were afraid; and some grew wilful 
and proud and would not yield, until life was reft from them. We who bear the 
ever-mounting burden of the years do not clearly understand this; but if that grief 
has returned to trouble you, as you say, then we fear that the Shadow arises once 
more and grows again in your hearts. Therefore, though you be the Dunedain, 
fairest of Men, who escaped from the Shadow of old and fought valiantly against 
it, we say to you: Beware! The will of Eru may not be gainsaid; and the Valar bid 
you earnestly not to withhold the trust to which you are called, lest soon it 
become again a bond by which you are constrained. Hope rather that in the end 
even the least of your desires shall have fruit. The love of Arda was set in your 
hearts by Iluvatar, and he does not plant to no purpose. Nonetheless, many ages 
of Men unborn may pass ere that purpose is made known; and to you it will be 
revealed and not to the Valar.’ 

These things took place in the days of Tar-Ciryatan the Shipbuilder, and of 
Tar-Atanamir his son; and they were proud men, eager for wealth, and they laid 
the men of Middle-earth under tribute, taking now rather than giving. It was to 
Tar-Atanamir that the Messengers came; and he was the thirteenth King, and in 
his day the Realm of Numenor had endured for more than two thousand years, 
and was come to the zenith of its bliss, if not yet of its power. But Atanamir was 
ill pleased with the counsel of the Messengers and gave little heed to it, and the 
greater part of his people followed him; for they wished still to escape death in 
their own day, not waiting upon hope. And Atanamir lived to a great age, 
clinging to his life beyond the end of all joy; and he was the first of the 
Numenoreans to do this, refusing to depart until he was witless and unmanned, 
and denying to his son the kingship at the height of his days. For the Lords of 
Numenor had been wont to wed late in their long lives and to depart and leave 
the mastery to their sons when these were come to full stature of body and mind. 

Then Tar-Ancalimon, son of Atanamir, became King, and he was of like mind; 
and in his day the people of Numenor became divided. On the one hand was the 
greater party, and they were called the King’s Men, and they grew proud and 
were estranged from the Eldar and the Valar. And on the other hand was the 
lesser party, and they were called the Elendili, the Elf-friends; for though they 
remained loyal indeed to the King and the House of Elros, they wished to keep 
the friendship of the Eldar, and they hearkened to the counsel of the Lords of the 
West. Nonetheless even they, who named themselves the Faithful, did not wholly 
escape from the affliction of their people, and they were troubled by the thought 
of death. 

Thus the bliss of Westernesse became diminished; but still its might and 
splendour increased. For the kings and their people had not yet abandoned 



wisdom, and if they loved the Valar no longer at least they still feared them. 
They did not dare openly to break the Ban or to sail beyond the limits that had 
been appointed. Eastwards still they steered their tall ships. But the fear of death 
grew ever darker upon them, and they delayed it by all means that they could; 
and they began to build great houses for their dead, while their wise men 
laboured unceasingly to discover if they might the secret of recalling life, or at 
the least of the prolonging of Men’s days. Yet they achieved only the art of 
preserving incorrupt the dead flesh of Men, and they filled all the land with 
silent tombs in which the thought of death was enshrined in the darkness. But 
those that lived turned the more eagerly to pleasure and revelry, desiring ever 
more goods and more riches; and after the days of Tar-Ancalimon the offering of 
the first fruits to Eru was neglected, and men went seldom any more to the 
Hallow upon the heights of Meneltarma in the midst of the land. 

Thus it came to pass in that time that the Numenoreans first made great 
settlements upon the west shores of the ancient lands; for their own land seemed 
to them shrunken, and they had no rest or content therein, and they desired now 
wealth and dominion in Middle-earth, since the West was denied. Great harbours 
and strong towers they made, and there many of them took up their abode; but 
they appeared now rather as lords and masters and gatherers of tribute than as 
helpers and teachers. And the great ships of the Numenoreans were borne east on 
the winds and returned ever laden, and the power and majesty of their kings 
were increased; and they drank and they feasted and they clad themselves in 
silver and gold. 

In all this the Elf-friends had small part. They alone came now ever to the 
north and the land of Gil-galad, keeping their friendship with the Elves and 
lending them aid against Sauron; and their haven was Pelargir above the mouths 
of Anduin the Great. But the King’s Men sailed far away to the south; and the 
lordships and strongholds that they made have left many rumours in the legends 
of Men. 





In this Age, as is elsewhere told, Sauron arose again in Middle-earth, and 
grew, and turned back to the evil in which he was nurtured by Morgoth, 
becoming mighty in his service. Already in the days of Tar-Minastir, the 
eleventh King of Numenor, he had fortified the land of Mordor and had built 
there the Tower of Barad-dur, and thereafter he strove ever for the dominion of 
Middle-earth, to become a king over all kings and as a god unto Men. And 
Sauron hated the Numenoreans, because of the deeds of their fathers and their 
ancient alliance with the Elves and allegiance to the Valar; nor did he forget the 
aid that Tar-Minastir had rendered to Gil-galad of old, in that time when the One 
Ring was forged and there was war between Sauron and the Elves in Eriador. 
Now he learned that the kings of Numenor had increased in power and 
splendour, and he hated them the more; and he feared them, lest they should 
invade his lands and wrest from him the dominion of the East. But for a long 
time he did not dare to challenge the Lords of the Sea, and he withdrew from the 
coasts. 

Yet Sauron was ever guileful, and it is said that among those whom he 
ensnared with the Nine Rings three were great lords of Numenorean race. And 
when the Ulairi arose that were the Ring-wraiths, his servants, and the strength 
of his terror and mastery over Men had grown exceedingly great, he began to 
assail the strong places of the Numenoreans upon the shores of the sea. 

In those days the Shadow grew deeper upon Numenor; and the lives of the 
Kings of the House of Elros waned because of their rebellion, but they hardened 
their hearts the more against the Valar. And the twentieth king took the sceptre of 
his fathers, and he ascended the throne in the name of Adunakhor, Lord of the 
West, forsaking the Elven-tongues and forbidding their use in his hearing. Yet in 
the Scroll of Kings the name Herunumen was inscribed in the High-elven 
speech, because of ancient custom, which the kings feared to break utterly, lest 
evil befall. Now this title seemed to the Faithful over-proud, being the title of the 
Valar; and their hearts were sorely tried between their loyalty to the House of 
Elros and their reverence of the appointed Powers. But worse was yet to come. 
For Ar-Gimilzor the twenty-third king was the greatest enemy of the Faithful. In 
his day the White Tree was untended and began to decline; and he forbade 
utterly the use of the Elven-tongues, and punished those that welcomed the ships 
of Eressea, that still came secretly to the west-shores of the land. 

Now the Elendili dwelt mostly in the western regions of Numenor; but Ar- 
Gimilzor commanded all that he could discover to be of this party to remove 



from the west and dwell in the east of the land; and there they were watched. 
And the chief dwelling of the Faithful in the later days was thus nigh to the 
harbour of Romenna; thence many set sail to Middle-earth, seeking the northern 
coasts where they might speak still with the Eldar in the kingdom of Gil-galad. 
This was known to the kings, but they hindered it not, so long as the Elendili 
departed from their land and did not return; for they desired to end all friendship 
between their people and the Eldar of Eressea, whom they named the Spies of 
the Valar, hoping to keep their deeds and their counsels hidden from the Lords of 
the West. But all that they did was known to Manwe, and the Valar were wroth 
with the Kings of Numenor, and gave them counsel and protection no more; and 
the ships of Eressea came never again out of the sunset, and the havens of 
Andunie were forlorn. 

Highest in honour after the house of the kings were the Lords of Andunie; for 
they were of the line of Elros, being descended from Silmarien, daughter of Tar- 
Elendil the fourth king of Numenor. And these lords were loyal to the kings, and 
revered them; and the Lord of Andunie was ever among the chief councillors of 
the Sceptre. Yet also from the beginning they bore especial love to the Eldar and 
reverence for the Valar; and as the Shadow grew they aided the Faithful as they 
could. But for long they did not declare themselves openly, and sought rather to 
amend the hearts of the lords of the Sceptre with wiser counsels. 

There was a lady Inzilbeth, renowned for her beauty, and her mother was 
Lindorie, sister of Earendur, the Lord of Andunie in the days of Ar-Sakalthor 
father of Ar-Gimilzor. Gimilzor took her to wife, though this was little to her 
liking, for she was in heart one of the Faithful, being taught by her mother; but 
the kings and their sons were grown proud and not to be gainsaid in their wishes. 
No love was there between Ar-Gimilzor and his queen, or between their sons. 
Inziladun, the elder, was like his mother in mind as in body; but Gimilkhad, the 
younger, went with his father, unless he were yet prouder and more wilful. To 
him Ar-Gimilzor would have yielded the sceptre rather than to the elder son, if 
the laws had allowed. 

But when Inziladun acceded to the sceptre, he took again a title in the Elven- 
tongue as of old, calling himself Tar-Palantir, for he was far-sighted both in eye 
and in mind, and even those that hated him feared his words as those of a true- 
seer. He gave peace for a while to the Faithful; and he went once more at due 
seasons to the Hallow of Em upon the Meneltarma, which Ar-Gimilzor had 
forsaken. The White Tree he tended again with honour; and he prophesied, 
saying that when the Tree perished, then also would the line of the Kings come 
to its end. But his repentance was too late to appease the anger of the Valar with 
the insolence of his fathers, of which the greater part of his people did not 



repent. And Gimilkhad was strong and ungentle, and he took the leadership of 
those that had been called the King’s Men and opposed the will of his brother as 
openly as he dared, and yet more in secret. Thus the days of Tar-Palantir became 
darkened with grief; and he would spend much of his time in the west, and there 
ascended often the ancient tower of King Minastir upon the hill of Oromet nigh 
to Andunie, whence he gazed westward in yearning, hoping to see, maybe, some 
sail upon the sea. But no ship came ever again from the West to Numenor, and 
Avallone was veiled in cloud. 

Now Gimilkhad died two years before his two hundredth year (which was 
accounted an early death for one of Elros’ line even in its waning), but this 
brought no peace to the King. For Pharazon son of Gimilkhad had become a man 
yet more restless and eager for wealth and power than his father. He had fared 
often abroad, as a leader in the wars that the Numenoreans made then in the 
coastlands of Middle-earth, seeking to extend their dominion over Men; and thus 
he had won great renown as a captain both by land and by sea. Therefore when 
he came back to Numenor, hearing of his father’s death, the hearts of the people 
were turned to him; for he brought with him great wealth, and was for the time 
free in his giving. 

And it came to pass that Tar-Palantir grew weary of grief and died. He had no 
son, but a daughter only, whom he named Miriel in the Elven-tongue; and to her 
now by right and the laws of the Numenoreans came the sceptre. But Pharazon 
took her to wife against her will, doing evil in this and evil also in that the laws 
of Numenor did not permit the marriage, even in the royal house, of those more 
nearly akin than cousins in the second degree. And when they were wed- ded, he 
seized the sceptre into his own hand, taking the title of Ar-Pharazon (Tar-Calion 
in the Elven-tongue); and the name of his queen he changed to Ar-Zimraphel. 

The mightiest and proudest was Ar-Pharazon the Golden of all those that had 
wielded the Sceptre of the Sea-Kings since the foundation of Numenor; and four 
and twenty Kings and Queens had ruled the Numenoreans before, and slept now 
in their deep tombs under the mount of Meneltarma, lying upon beds of gold. 

And sitting upon his carven throne in the city of Armenelos in the glory of his 
power, he brooded darkly, thinking of war. For he had learned in Middle-earth of 
the strength of the realm of Sauron, and of his hatred of Westernesse. And now 
there came to him the masters of ships and captains returning out of the East, and 
they reported that Sauron was putting forth his might, since Ar-Pharazon had 
gone back from Middle-earth, and he was pressing down upon the cities by the 
coasts; and he had taken now the title of King of Men, and declared his purpose 
to drive the Numenoreans into the sea, and destroy even Numenor, if that might 
be. 



Great was the anger of Ar-Pharazon at these tidings, and as he pondered long 
in secret, his heart was filled with the desire of power unbounded and the sole 
dominion of his will. And he determined without counsel of the Valar, or the aid 
of any wisdom but his own, that the title of King of Men he would himself 
claim, and would compel Sauron to become his vassal and his servant; for in his 
pride he deemed that no king should ever arise so mighty as to vie with the Heir 
of Earendil. Therefore he began in that time to smithy great hoard of weapons, 
and many ships of war he built and stored them with his arms; and when all was 
made ready he himself set sail with his host into the East. 

And men saw his sails coming up out of the sunset, dyed as with scarlet and 
gleaming with red and gold, and fear fell upon the dwellers by the coasts, and 
they fled far away. But the fleet came at last to that place that was called Umbar, 
where was the mighty haven of the Numenoreans that no hand had wrought. 
Empty and silent were all the lands about when the King of the Sea marched 
upon Middle-earth. For seven days he journeyed with banner and trumpet, and 
he came to a hill, and he went up, and he set there his pavilion and his throne; 
and he sat him down in the midst of the land, and the tents of his host were 
ranged all about him, blue, golden, and white, as a field of tall flowers. Then he 
sent forth heralds, and he commanded Sauron to come before him and swear to 
him fealty. 

And Sauron came. Even from his mighty tower of Baraddur he came, and 
made no offer of battle. For he perceived that the power and majesty of the 
Kings of the Sea surpassed all rumour of them, so that he could not trust even 
the greatest of his servants to withstand them; and he saw not his time yet to 
work his will with the Dunedain. And he was crafty, well skilled to gain what he 
would by subtlety when force might not avail. Therefore he humbled himself 
before Ar-Pharazon and smoothed his tongue; and men wondered, for all that he 
said seemed fair and wise. 

But Ar-Pharazon was not yet deceived, and it came into his mind that, for the 
better keeping of Sauron and of his oaths of fealty, he should be brought to 
Numenor, there to dwell as a hostage for himself and all his servants in Middle- 
earth. To this Sauron assented as one constrained, yet in his secret thought he 
received it gladly, for it chimed indeed with his desire. And Sauron passed over 
the sea and looked upon the land of Numenor, and on the city of Armenelos in 
the days of its glory, and he was astounded; but his heart within was filled the 
more with envy and hate. 

Yet such was the cunning of his mind and mouth, and the strength of his 
hidden will, that ere three years had passed he had become closest to the secret 
counsels of the King; for flattery sweet as honey was ever on his tongue, and 



knowledge he had of many things yet unrevealed to Men. And seeing the favour 
that he had of their lord all the councillors began to fawn upon him, save one 
alone, Amandil lord of Andunie. Then slowly a change came over the land, and 
the hearts of the Elf-friends were sorely troubled, and many fell away out of 
fear; and although those that remained still called themselves the Faithful, their 
enemies named them rebels. For now, having the ears of men, Sauron with many 
arguments gainsaid all that the Valar had taught; and he bade men think that in 
the world, in the east and even in the west, there lay yet many seas and many 
lands for their winning, wherein was wealth uncounted. And still, if they should 
at the last come to the end of those lands and seas, beyond all lay the Ancient 
Darkness. ‘And out of it the world was made. For Darkness alone is worshipful, 
and the Ford thereof may yet make other worlds to be gifts to those that serve 
him, so that the increase of their power shall find no end.’ 

And Ar-Pharazon said: ‘Who is the Ford of the Darkness?’ Then behind 
locked doors Sauron spoke to the King, and he lied, saying: ‘It is he whose name 
is not now spoken; for the Valar have deceived you concerning him, putting 
forward the name of Eru, a phantom devised in the folly of their hearts, seeking 
to enchain Men in servitude to themselves. For they are the oracle of this Eru, 
which speaks only what they will. But he that is their master shall yet prevail, 
and he will deliver you from this phantom; and his name is Melkor, Ford of All, 
Giver of Freedom, and he shall make you stronger than they.’ 

Then Ar-Pharazon the King turned back to the worship of the Dark, and of 
Melkor the Ford thereof, at first in secret, but ere long openly and in the face of 
his people; and they for the most part followed him. Yet there dwelt still a 
remnant of the Faithful, as has been told, at Romenna and in the country near, 
and other few there were here and there in the land. The chief among them, to 
whom they looked for leading and courage in evil days, was Amandil, councillor 
of the King, and his son Elendil, whose sons were Isildur and Anarion, then 
young men by the reckoning of Numenor. Amandil and Elendil were great ship- 
captains; and they were of the line of Elros Tar-Minyatur, though not of the 
ruling house to whom belonged the crown and the throne in the city of 
Armenelos. In the days of their youth together Amandil had been dear to 
Pharazon, and though he was of the Elf-friends he remained in his council until 
the coming of Sauron. Now he was dismissed, for Sauron hated him above all 
others in Numenor. But he was so noble, and had been so mighty a captain of the 
sea, that he was still held in honour by many of the people, and neither the King 
nor Sauron dared to lay hands on him as yet. 

Therefore Amandil withdrew to Romenna, and all that he trusted still to be 
faithful he summoned to come thither in secret; for he feared that evil would 



now grow apace, and all the Elf-friends were in peril. And so it soon came to 
pass. For the Meneltarma was utterly deserted in those days; and though not 
even Sauron dared to defile the high place, yet the King would let no man, upon 
pain of death, ascend to it, not even those of the Faithful who kept Iluvatar in 
their hearts. And Sauron urged the King to cut down the White Tree, Nimloth the 
Fair, that grew in his courts, for it was a memorial of the Eldar and of the light of 
Valinor. 

At the first the King would not assent to this, since he believed that the 
fortunes of his house were bound up with the Tree, as was forespoken by Tar- 
Palantir. Thus in his folly he who now hated the Eldar and the Valar vainly clung 
to the shadow of the old allegiance of Numenor. But when Amandil heard 
rumour of the evil purpose of Sauron he was grieved to the heart, knowing that 
in the end Sauron would surely have his will. Then he spoke to Elendil and the 
sons of Elendil, recalling the tale of the Trees of Valinor; and Isildur said no 
word, but went out by night and did a deed for which he was afterwards 
renowned. For he passed alone in disguise to Armenelos and to the courts of the 
King, which were now forbidden to the Faithful; and he came to the place of the 
Tree, which was forbidden to all by the orders of Sauron, and the Tree was 
watched day and night by guards in his service. At that time Nimloth was dark 
and bore no bloom, for it was late in the autumn, and its winter was nigh; and 
Isildur passed through the guards and took from the Tree a fruit that hung upon 
it, and turned to go. But the guard was aroused, and he was assailed, and fought 
his way out, receiving many wounds; and he escaped, and because he was 
disguised it was not discovered who had laid hands on the Tree. But Isildur came 
at last hardly back to Romenna and delivered the fruit to the hands of Amandil, 
ere his strength failed him. Then the fruit was planted in secret, and it was 
blessed by Amandil; and a shoot arose from it and sprouted in the spring. But 
when its first leaf opened then Isildur, who had lain long and come near to death, 
arose and was troubled no more by his wounds. 

None too soon was this done; for after the assault the King yielded to Sauron 
and felled the White Tree, and turned then wholly away from the allegiance of 
his fathers. But Sauron caused to be built upon the hill in the midst of the city of 
the Numenoreans, Armenelos the Golden, a mighty temple; and it was in the 
form of a circle at the base, and there the walls were fifty feet in thickness, and 
the width of the base was five hundred feet across the centre, and the walls rose 
from the ground five hundred feet, and they were crowned with a mighty dome. 
And that dome was roofed all with silver, and rose glittering in the sun, so that 
the light of it could be seen afar off; but soon the light was darkened, and the 
silver became black. For there was an altar of fire in the midst of the temple, and 



in the topmost of the dome there was a louver, whence there issued a great 
smoke. And the first fire upon the altar Sauron kindled with the hewn wood of 
Nimloth, and it crackled and was consumed; but men marvelled at the reek that 
went up from it, so that the land lay under a cloud for seven days, until slowly it 
passed into the west. 

Thereafter the fire and smoke went up without ceasing; for the power of 
Sauron daily increased, and in that temple, with spilling of blood and torment 
and great wickedness, men made sacrifice to Melkor that he should release them 
from Death. And most often from among the Faithful they chose their victims; 
yet never openly on the charge that they would not worship Melkor, the Giver of 
Freedom, rather was cause sought against them that they hated the King and 
were his rebels, or that they plotted against their kin, devising lies and poisons. 
These charges were for the most part false; yet those were bitter days, and hate 
brings forth hate. 

But for all this Death did not depart from the land, rather it came sooner and 
more often, and in many dreadful guises. For whereas aforetime men had grown 
slowly old, and had laid them down in the end to sleep, when they were weary at 
last of the world, now madness and sickness assailed them; and yet they were 
afraid to die and go out into the dark, the realm of the lord that they had taken; 
and they cursed themselves in their agony. And men took weapons in those days 
and slew one another for little cause; for they were become quick to anger, and 
Sauron, or those whom he had bound to himself, went about the land setting man 
against man, so that the people murmured against the King and the lords, or 
against any that had aught that they had not; and the men of power took cruel 
revenge. 

Nonetheless for long it seemed to the Numenoreans that they prospered, and if 
they were not increased in happiness, yet they grew more strong, and their rich 
men ever richer. For with the aid and counsel of Sauron they multiplied their 
possessions, and they devised engines, and they built ever greater ships. And 
they sailed now with power and armoury to Middle-earth, and they came no 
longer as bringers of gifts, nor even as rulers, but as fierce men of war. And they 
hunted the men of Middle-earth and took their goods and enslaved them, and 
many they slew cruelly upon their altars. For they built in their fortresses 
temples and great tombs in those days; and men feared them, and the memory of 
the kindly kings of the ancient days faded from the world and was darkened by 
many a tale of dread. 

Thus Ar-Pharazon, King of the Land of the Star, grew to the mightiest tyrant 
that had yet been in the world since the reign of Morgoth, though in truth Sauron 
ruled all from behind the throne. But the years passed, and the King felt the 



shadow of death approach, as his days lengthened; and he was filled with fear 
and wrath. Now came the hour that Sauron had prepared and long had awaited. 
And Sauron spoke to the King, saying that his strength was now so great that he 
might think to have his will in all things, and be subject to no command or ban. 

And he said: ‘The Valar have possessed themselves of the land where there is 
no death; and they lie to you concerning it, hiding it as best they may, because of 
their avarice, and their fear lest the Kings of Men should wrest from them the 
deathless realm and rule the world in their stead. And though, doubtless, the gift 
of life unending is not for all, but only for such as are worthy, being men of 
might and pride and great lineage, yet against all justice is it done that this gift, 
which is his due, should be withheld from the King of Kings, Ar-Pharazon, 
mightiest of the sons of Earth, to whom Manwe alone can be compared, if even 
he. But great kings do not brook denials, and take what is their due.’ 

Then Ar-Pharazon, being besotted, and walking under the shadow of death, 
for his span was drawing towards its end, hearkened to Sauron; and he began to 
ponder in his heart how he might make war upon the Valar. He was long 
preparing this design, and he spoke not openly of it, yet it could not be hidden 
from all. And Amandil, becoming aware of the purposes of the King, was 
dismayed and filled with a great dread, for he knew that Men could not vanquish 
the Valar in war, and that ruin must come upon the world, if this war were not 
stayed. Therefore he called his son, Elendil, and he said to him: 

‘The days are dark, and there is no hope for Men, for the Faithful are few. 
Therefore I am minded to try that counsel which our forefather Earendil took of 
old, to sail into the West, be there ban or no, and to speak to the Valar, even to 
Manwe himself, if may be, and beseech his aid ere all is lost.’ 

‘Would you then betray the King?’ said Elendil. ‘For you know well the 
charge that they make against us, that we are traitors and spies, and that until this 
day it has been false.’ 

‘If I thought that Manwe needed such a messenger,’ said Amandil, ‘I would 
betray the King. For there is but one loyalty from which no man can be absolved 
in heart for any cause. But it is for mercy upon Men and their deliverance from 
Sauron the Deceiver that I would plead, since some at least have remained 
faithful. And as for the Ban, I will suffer in myself the penalty, lest all my people 
should become guilty.’ 

‘But what think you, my father, is like to befall those of your house whom you 
leave behind, when your deed becomes known?’ 

‘It must not become known,’ said Amandil. ‘I will prepare my going in secret, 
and I will set sail into the east, whither daily the ships depart from our havens; 
and thereafter, as wind and chance may allow, I will go about, through south or 



north, back into the west, and seek what I may find. But for you and your folk, 
my son, I counsel that you should prepare yourselves other ships, and put aboard 
all such things as your hearts cannot bear to part with; and when the ships are 
ready, you should lie in the haven of Romenna, and give out among men that 
you purpose, when you see your time, to follow me into the east. Amandil is no 
longer so dear to our kinsman upon the throne that he will grieve over much, if 
we seek to depart, for a season or for good. But let it not be seen that you intend 
to take many men, or he will be troubled, because of the war that he now plots, 
for which he will need all the force that he may gather. Seek out the Faithful that 
are known still to be true, and let them join you in secret, if they are willing to go 
with you, and share in your design.’ 

‘And what shall that design be?’ said Elendil. 

‘To meddle not in the war, and to watch,’ answered Amandil. ‘Until I return I 
can say no more. But it is most like that you shall fly from the Land of the Star 
with no star to guide you; for that land is defiled. Then you shall lose all that you 
have loved, foretasting death in life, seeking a land of exile elsewhere. But east 
or west the Valar alone can say.’ 

Then Amandil said farewell to all his household, as one that is about to die. 
‘For,’ said he, ‘it may well prove that you will see me never again; and that I 
shall show you no such sign as Earendil showed long ago. But hold you ever in 
readiness, for the end of the world that we have known is now at hand.’ 

It is said that Amandil set sail in a small ship at night, and steered first 
eastward, and then went about and passed into the west. And he took with him 
three servants, dear to his heart, and never again were they heard of by word or 
sign in this world, nor is there any tale or guess of their fate. Men could not a 
second time be saved by any such embassy, and for the treason of Numenor 
there was no easy absolving. 

But Elendil did all that his father had bidden, and his ships lay off the east 
coast of the land; and the Faithful put aboard their wives and their children, and 
their heirlooms, and great store of goods. Many things there were of beauty and 
power, such as the Numenoreans had contrived in the days of their wisdom, 
vessels and jewels, and scrolls of lore written in scarlet and black. And Seven 
Stones they had, the gift of the Eldar; but in the ship of Isildur was guarded the 
young tree, the scion of Nimloth the Fair. Thus Elendil held himself in readiness, 
and did not meddle in the evil deeds of those days; and ever he looked for a sign 
that did not come. Then he journeyed in secret to the western shores and gazed 
out over the sea, for sorrow and yearning were upon him, and he greatly loved 
his father. But naught could he descry save the fleets of Ar-Pharazon gathering 
in the havens of the west. 



Now aforetime in the isle of Numenor the weather was ever apt to the needs 
and liking of Men: rain in due season and ever in measure; and sunshine, now 
warmer, now cooler, and winds from the sea. And when the wind was in the 
west, it seemed to many that it was filled with a fragrance, fleeting but sweet, 
heart-stirring, as of flowers that bloom for ever in undying meads and have no 
names on mortal shores. But all this was now changed; for the sky itself was 
darkened, and there were storms of rain and hail in those days, and violent 
winds; and ever and anon a great ship of the Numenoreans would founder and 
return not to haven, though such a grief had not till then befallen them since the 
rising of the Star. And out of the west there would come at times a great cloud in 
the evening, shaped as it were an eagle, with pinions spread to the north and the 
south; and slowly it would loom up, blotting out the sunset, and then uttermost 
night would fall upon Numenor. And some of the eagles bore lightning beneath 
their wings, and thunder echoed between sea and cloud. 

Then men grew afraid. ‘Behold the Eagles of the Lords of the West!’ they 
cried. ‘The Eagles of Manwe are come upon Numenor!’ And they fell upon their 
faces. 

Then some few would repent for a season, but others hardened their hearts, 
and they shook their fists at heaven, saying: ‘The Lords of the West have plotted 
against us. They strike first. The next blow shall be ours!’ These words the King 
himself spoke, but they were devised by Sauron. 

Now the lightnings increased and slew men upon the hills, and in the fields, 
and in the streets of the city; and a fiery bolt smote the dome of the Temple and 
shore it asunder, and it was wreathed in flame. But the Temple itself was 
unshaken, and Sauron stood there upon the pinnacle and defied the lightning and 
was unharmed; and in that hour men called him a god and did all that he would. 
When therefore the last portent came they heeded it little. For the land shook 
under them, and a groaning as of thunder underground was mingled with the 
roaring of the sea, and smoke issued from the peak of the Meneltarma. But all 
the more did Ar-Pharazon press on with his armament. 

In that time the fleets of the Numenoreans darkened the sea upon the west of 
the land, and they were like an archipelago of a thousand isles; their masts were 
as a forest upon the mountains, and their sails like a brooding cloud; and their 
banners were golden and black. And all things waited upon the word of Ar- 
Pharazon; and Sauron withdrew into the inmost circle of the Temple, and men 
brought him victims to be burned. 

Then the Eagles of the Lords of the West came up out of the dayfall, and they 
were arrayed as for battle, advancing in a line the end of which diminished 
beyond sight; and as they came their wings spread ever wider, grasping the sky. 



But the West burned red behind them, and they glowed beneath, as though they 
were lit with a flame of great anger, so that all Numenor was illumined as with a 
smouldering fire; and men looked upon the faces of their fellows, and it seemed 
to them that they were red with wrath. 

Then Ar-Pharazon hardened his heart, and he went aboard his mighty ship, 
Alcarondas, Castle of the Sea. Many-oared it was and many-masted, golden and 
sable; and upon it the throne of Ar-Pharazon was set. Then he did on his panoply 
and his crown, and let raise his standard, and he gave the signal for the raising of 
the anchors; and in that hour the trumpets of Numenor outrang the thunder. 

Thus the fleets of the Numenoreans moved against the menace of the West; 
and there was little wind, but they had many oars and many strong slaves to row 
beneath the lash. The sun went down, and there came a great silence. Darkness 
fell upon the land, and the sea was still, while the world waited for what should 
betide. Slowly the fleets passed out of the sight of the watchers in the havens, 
and their lights faded, and night took them; and in the morning they were gone. 
For a wind arose in the east and it wafted them away; and they broke the Ban of 
the Valar, and sailed into forbidden seas, going up with war against the 
Deathless, to wrest from them everlasting life within the Circles of the World. 









But the fleets of Ar-Pharazon came up out of the deeps of the sea and 
encompassed Avallone and all the isle of Eressea, and the Eldar mourned, for the 
light of the setting sun was cut off by the cloud of the Numenoreans. And at last 
Ar-Pharazon came even to Aman, the Blessed Realm, and the coasts of Valinor; 
and still all was silent, and doom hung by a thread. For Ar-Pharazon wavered at 
the end, and almost he turned back. His heart misgave him when he looked upon 
the soundless shores and saw Taniquetil shining, whiter than snow, colder than 
death, silent, immutable, terrible as the shadow of the light of Iluvatar. But pride 
was now his master, and at last he left his ship and strode upon the shore, 
claiming the land for his own, if none should do battle for it. And a host of the 
Numenoreans encamped in might about Tuna, whence all the Eldar had fled. 

Then Manwe upon the Mountain called upon Iluvatar, and for that time the 
Valar laid down their government of Arda. But Iluvatar showed forth his power, 
and he changed the fashion of the world; and a great chasm opened in the sea 
between Numenor and the Deathless Lands, and the waters flowed down into it, 
and the noise and smoke of the cataracts went up to heaven, and the world was 
shaken. And all the fleets of the Numenoreans were drawn down into the abyss, 
and they were drowned and swallowed up for ever. But Ar-Pharazon the King 
and the mortal warriors that had set foot upon the land of Aman were buried 
under falling hills: there it is said that they lie imprisoned in the Caves of the 
Forgotten, until the Last Battle and the Day of Doom. 

But the land of Aman and Eressea of the Eldar were taken away and removed 
beyond the reach of Men for ever. And Andor, the Land of Gift, Numenor of the 
Kings, Elenna of the Star of Earendil, was utterly destroyed. For it was nigh to 
the east of the great rift, and its foundations were overturned, and it fell and went 
down into darkness, and is no more. And there is not now upon Earth any place 
abiding where the memory of a time without evil is preserved. For Iluvatar cast 
back the Great Seas west of Middle-earth, and the Empty Lands east of it, and 
new lands and new seas were made; and the world was diminished, for Valinor 
and Eressea were taken from it into the realm of hidden things. 

In an hour unlooked for by Men this doom befell, on the nine and thirtieth day 
since the passing of the fleets. Then suddenly fire burst from the Meneltarma, 
and there came a mighty wind and a tumult of the earth, and the sky reeled, and 
the hills slid, and Numenor went down into the sea, with all its children and its 
wives and its maidens and its ladies proud; and all its gardens and its halls and 
its towers, its tombs and its riches, and its jewels and its webs and its things 



painted and carven, and its laughter and its mirth and its music, its wisdom and 
its lore: they vanished for ever. And last of all the mounting wave, green and 
cold and plumed with foam, climbing over the land, took to its bosom Tar-Miriel 
the Queen, fairer than silver or ivory or pearls. Too late she strove to ascend the 
steep ways of the Meneltarma to the holy place; for the waters overtook her, and 
her cry was lost in the roaring of the wind. 

But whether or no it were that Amandil came indeed to Valinor and Manwe 
hearkened to his prayer, by grace of the Valar Elendil and his sons and their 
people were spared from the ruin of that day. For Elendil had remained in 
Romenna, refusing the summons of the King when he set forth to war; and 
avoiding the soldiers of Sauron that came to seize him and drag him to the fires 
of the Temple, he went aboard his ship and stood off from the shore, waiting on 
the time. There he was protected by the land from the great draught of the sea 
that drew all towards the abyss, and afterwards he was sheltered from the first 
fury of the storm. But when the devouring wave rolled over the land and 
Numenor toppled to its fall, then he would have been overwhelmed and would 
have deemed it the lesser grief to perish, for no wrench of death could be more 
bitter than the loss and agony of that day; but the great wind took him, wilder 
than any wind that Men had known, roaring from the west, and it swept his ships 
far away; and it rent their sails and snapped their masts, hunting the unhappy 
men like straws upon the water. 

Nine ships there were: four for Elendil, and for Isildur three, and for Anarion 
two; and they fled before the black gale out of the twilight of doom into the 
darkness of the world. And the deeps rose beneath them in towering anger, and 
waves like unto mountains moving with great caps of writhen snow bore them 
up amid the wreckage of the clouds, and after many days cast them away upon 
the shores of Middle-earth. And all the coasts and seaward regions of the 
western world suffered great change and ruin in that time; for the seas invaded 
the lands, and shores foundered, and ancient isles were drowned, and new isles 
were uplifted; and hills crumbled and rivers were turned into strange courses. 






Elendil and his sons after founded kingdoms in Middle-earth; and though their 
lore and craft was but an echo of that which had been ere Sauron came to 
Numenor, yet very great it seemed to the wild men of the world. And much is 
said in other lore of the deeds of the heirs of Elendil in the age that came after, 
and of their strife with Sauron that not yet was ended. 

For Sauron himself was filled with great fear at the wrath of the Valar, and the 
doom that Eru laid upon sea and land. It was greater far than aught he had 
looked for, hoping only for the death of the Numenoreans and the defeat of their 
proud king. And Sauron, sitting in his black seat in the midst of the Temple, had 
laughed when he heard the trumpets of Ar-Pharazon sounding for battle; and 
again he had laughed when he heard the thunder of the storm; and a third time, 
even as he laughed at his own thought, thinking what he would do now in the 
world, being rid of the Edain for ever, he was taken in the midst of his mirth, and 
his seat and his temple fell into the abyss. But Sauron was not of mortal flesh, 
and though he was robbed now of that shape in which he had wrought so great 
an evil, so that he could never again appear fair to the eyes of Men, yet his spirit 
arose out of the deep and passed as a shadow and a black wind over the sea, and 
came back to Middle-earth and to Mordor that was his home. There he took up 
again his great Ring in Barad-dur, and dwelt there, dark and silent, until he 
wrought himself a new guise, an image of malice and hatred made visible; and 
the Eye of Sauron the Terrible few could endure. 

But these things come not into the tale of the Drowning of Numenor, of which 
now all is told. And even the name of that land perished, and Men spoke 
thereafter not of Elenna, nor of Andor the Gift that was taken away, nor of 
Numenore on the confines of the world; but the exiles on the shores of the sea, if 
they turned towards the West in the desire of their hearts, spoke of Mar-nu- 
Falmar that was whelmed in the waves, Akallabeth the Downfallen, Atalante in 
the Eldarin tongue. 










Among the Exiles many believed that the summit of the Meneltarma, the 
Pillar of Heaven, was not drowned for ever, but rose again above the waves, 
a lonely island lost in the great waters; for it had been a hallowed place, and 
even in the days of Sauron none had defiled it. And some there were of the 
seed of Earendil that afterwards sought for it, because it was said among 
loremasters that the farsighted men of old could see from the Meneltarma a 
glimmer of the Deathless Land. For even after the ruin the hearts of the 
Dunedain were still set westwards; and though they knew indeed that the 
world was changed, they said: ‘Avallone is vanished from the Earth and the 
Land of Aman is taken away, and in the world of this present darkness they 
cannot be found. Yet once they were, and therefore they still are, in true 
being and in the whole shape of the world as at first it was devised.’ 

For the Dunedain held that even mortal Men, if so blessed, might look 
upon other times than those of their bodies’ life; and they longed ever to 
escape from the shadows of their exile and to see in some fashion the light 
that dies not; for the sorrow of the thought of death had pursued them over 
the deeps of the sea. Thus it was that great mariners among them would still 
search the empty seas, hoping to come upon the Isle of Meneltarma, and 
there to see a vision of things that were. But they found it not. And those 
that sailed far came only to the new lands, and found them like to the old 
lands, and subject to death. And those that sailed furthest set but a girdle 
about the Earth and returned weary at last to the place of their beginning; 
and they said: ‘All roads are now bent.’ 

Thus in after days, what by the voyages of ships, what by lore and star- 
craft, the kings of Men knew that the world was indeed made round, and yet 
the Eldar were permitted still to depart and to come to the Ancient West and 
to Avallone, if they would. Therefore the loremasters of Men said that a 
Straight Road must still be, for those that were permitted to find it. And 
they taught that, while the new world fell away, the old road and the path of 
the memory of the West still went on, as it were a mighty bridge invisible 
that passed through the air of breath and of flight (which were bent now as 
the world was bent), and traversed Ilmen which flesh unaided cannot 
endure, until it came to Tol Eressea, the Lonely Isle, and maybe even 
beyond, to Valinor, where the Valar still dwell and watch the unfolding of 
the story of the world. And tales and rumours arose along the shores of the 
sea concerning mariners and men forlorn upon the water who, by some fate 



or grace or favour of the Valar, had entered in upon the Straight Way and 
seen the face of the world sink below them, and so had come to the lamplit 
quays of Avallone, or verily to the last beaches on the margin of Aman, and 
there had looked upon the White Mountain, dreadful and beautiful, before 
they died. 
















OF THE RINGS OF POWER AND THE THIRD AGE 



OF THF. RTNGS OF POWER AND THF. 

TFIIRD AGF. 


in which these tales come to their end 

Of old there was Sauron the Maia, whom the Sindar in Beleriand named 
Gorthaur. In the beginning of Arda Melkor seduced him to his allegiance, and he 
became the greatest and most trusted of the servants of the Enemy, and the most 
perilous, for he could assume many forms, and for long if he willed he could still 
appear noble and beautiful, so as to deceive all but the most wary. 

When Thangorodrim was broken and Morgoth overthrown, Sauron put on his 
fair hue again and did obeisance to Eonwe, the herald of Manwe, and abjured all 
his evil deeds. And some hold that this was not at first falsely done, but that 
Sauron in truth repented, if only out of fear, being dismayed by the fall of 
Morgoth and the great wrath of the Lords of the West. But it was not within the 
power of Eonwe to pardon those of his own order, and he commanded Sauron to 
return to Aman and there receive the judgement of Manwe. Then Sauron was 
ashamed, and he was unwilling to return in humiliation and to receive from the 
Valar a sentence, it might be, of long servitude in proof of his good faith; for 
under Morgoth his power had been great. Therefore when Eonwe departed he 
hid himself in Middle-earth; and he fell back into evil, for the bonds that 
Morgoth had laid upon him were very strong. 


In the Great Battle and the tumults of the fall of Thangorodrim there were 
mighty convulsions in the earth, and Beleriand was broken and laid waste; and 
northward and westward many lands sank beneath the waters of the Great Sea. 
In the east, in Ossiriand, the walls of Ered Luin were broken, and a great gap 
was made in them towards the south, and a gulf of the sea flowed in. Into that 
gulf the River Lhun fell by a new course, and it was called therefore the Gulf of 
Lhun. That country had of old been named Lindon by the Noldor, and this name 
it bore thereafter; and many of the Eldar still dwelt there, lingering, unwilling yet 
to forsake Beleriand where they had fought and laboured long. Gil-galad son of 
Fingon was their king, and with him was Elrond Half-elven, son of Earendil the 




Mariner and brother of Elros first king of Numenor. 

Upon the shores of the Gulf of Lhun the Elves built their havens, and named 
them Mithlond; and there they held many ships, for the harbourage was good. 
From the Grey Havens the Eldar ever and anon set sail, fleeing from the 
darkness of the days of Earth; for by the mercy of the Valar the First-born could 
still follow the Straight Road and return, if they would, to their kindred in 
Eressea and Valinor beyond the encircling seas. 

Others of the Eldar there were who crossed the mountains of Ered Luin in that 
age and passed into the inner lands. Many of these were Teleri, survivors of 
Doriath and Ossiriand; and they established realms among the Silvan Elves in 
woods and mountains far from the sea, for which nonetheless they ever yearned 
in their hearts. Only in Eregion, which Men called Hollin, did Elves of Noldorin 
race establish a lasting realm beyond the Ered Luin. Eregion was nigh to the 
great mansions of the Dwarves that were named Khazad-dum, but by the Elves 
Hadhodrond, and afterwards Moria. From Ost-in-Edhil, the city of the Elves, the 
highroad ran to the west gate of Khazad-dum, for a friendship arose between 
Dwarves and Elves, such as has never elsewhere been, to the enrichment of both 
those peoples. In Eregion the craftsmen of the Gwaith-i-Mirdain, the People of 
the Jewel-smiths, surpassed in cunning all that have ever wrought, save only 
Feanor himself; and indeed greatest in skill among them was Celebrimbor, son 
of Curufin, who was estranged from his father and remained in Nargothrond 
when Celegorm and Curufin were driven forth, as is told in the Quenta 
Silmarillion. 









Elsewhere in Middle-earth there was peace for many years; yet the lands were 
for the most part savage and desolate, save only where the people of Beleriand 
came. Many Elves dwelt there indeed, as they had dwelt through the countless 
years, wandering free in the wide lands far from the Sea; but they were Avari, to 
whom the deeds of Beleriand were but a rumour and Valinor only a distant 
name. And in the south and in the further east Men multiplied; and most of them 
turned to evil, for Sauron was at work. 

Seeing the desolation of the world, Sauron said in his heart that the Valar, 
having overthrown Morgoth, had again forgotten Middle-earth; and his pride 
grew apace. He looked with hatred on the Eldar, and he feared the Men of 
Numenor who came back at whiles in their ships to the shores of Middle-earth; 
but for long he dissembled his mind and concealed the dark designs that he 
shaped in his heart. 

Men he found the easiest to sway of all the peoples of the Earth; but long he 
sought to persuade the Elves to his service, for he knew that the Firstborn had 
the greater power; and he went far and wide among them, and his hue was still 
that of one both fair and wise. Only to Lindon he did not come, for Gil-galad and 
Elrond doubted him and his fair-seeming, and though they knew not who in truth 
he was they would not admit him to that land. But elsewhere the Elves received 
him gladly, and few among them hearkened to the messengers from Lindon 
bidding them beware; for Sauron took to himself the name of Annatar, the Lord 
of Gifts, and they had at first much profit from his friendship. And he said to 
them: ‘Alas, for the weakness of the great! For a mighty king is Gil-galad, and 
wise in all lore is Master Elrond, and yet they will not aid me in my labours. Can 
it be that they do not desire to see other lands become as blissful as their own? 
But wherefore should Middle-earth remain for ever desolate and dark, whereas 
the Elves could make it as fair as Eressea, nay even as Valinor? And since you 
have not returned thither, as you might, I perceive that you love this Middle- 
earth, as do I. Is it not then our task to labour together for its enrichment, and for 
the raising of all the Elven-kindreds that wander here untaught to the height of 
that power and knowledge which those have who are beyond the Sea?’ 

It was in Eregion that the counsels of Sauron were most gladly received, for in 
that land the Noldor desired ever to increase the skill and subtlety of their works. 
Moreover they were not at peace in their hearts, since they had refused to return 
into the West, and they desired both to stay in Middle-earth, which indeed they 
loved, and yet to enjoy the bliss of those that had departed. Therefore they 



hearkened to Sauron, and they learned of him many things, for his knowledge 
was great. In those days the smiths of Ost-in-Edhil surpassed all that they had 
contrived before; and they took thought, and they made Rings of Power. But 
Sauron guided their labours, and he was aware of all that they did; for his desire 
was to set a bond upon the Elves and to bring them under his vigilance. 

Now the Elves made many rings; but secretly Sauron made One Ring to rule 
all the others, and their power was bound up with it, to be subject wholly to it 
and to last only so long as it too should last. And much of the strength and will 
of Sauron passed into that One Ring; for the power of the Elven-rings was very 
great, and that which should govern them must be a thing of surpassing potency; 
and Sauron forged it in the Mountain of Fire in the Land of Shadow. And while 
he wore the One Ring he could perceive all the things that were done by means 
of the lesser rings, and he could see and govern the very thoughts of those that 
wore them. 

But the Elves were not so lightly to be caught. As soon as Sauron set the One 
Ring upon his finger they were aware of him; and they knew him, and perceived 
that he would be master of them, and of all that they wrought. Then in anger and 
fear they took off their rings. But he, finding that he was betrayed and that the 
Elves were not deceived, was filled with wrath; and he came against them with 
open war, demanding that all the rings should be delivered to him, since the 
Elven-smiths could not have attained to their making without his lore and 
counsel. But the Elves fled from him; and three of their rings they saved, and 
bore them away, and hid them. 

Now these were the Three that had last been made, and they possessed the 
greatest powers. Narya, Nenya, and Vilya, they were named, the Rings of Fire, 
and of Water, and of Air, set with ruby and adamant and sapphire; and of all the 
Elven-rings Sauron most desired to possess them, for those who had them in 
their keeping could ward off the decays of time and postpone the weariness of 
the world. But Sauron could not discover them, for they were given into the 
hands of the Wise, who concealed them and never again used them openly while 
Sauron kept the Ruling Ring. Therefore the Three remained unsullied, for they 
were forged by Celebrimbor alone, and the hand of Sauron had never touched 
them; yet they also were subject to the One. 

From that time war never ceased between Sauron and the Elves; and Eregion 
was laid waste, and Celebrimbor slain, and the doors of Moria were shut. In that 
time the stronghold and refuge of Imladris, that Men called Rivendell, was 
founded by Elrond Half-elven; and long it endured. But Sauron gathered into his 
hands all the remaining Rings of Power; and he dealt them out to the other 
peoples of Middle-earth, hoping thus to bring under his sway all those that 



desired secret power beyond the measure of their kind. Seven rings he gave to 
the Dwarves; but to Men he gave nine, for Men proved in this matter as in others 
the readiest to his will. And all those rings that he governed he perverted, the 
more easily since he had a part in their making, and they were accursed, and they 
betrayed in the end all those that used them. The Dwarves indeed proved tough 
and hard to tame; they ill endure the domination of others, and the thoughts of 
their hearts are hard to fathom, nor can they be turned to shadows. They used 
their rings only for the getting of wealth; but wrath and an overmastering greed 
of gold were kindled in their hearts, of which evil enough after came to the profit 
of Sauron. It is said that the foundation of each of the Seven Hoards of the 
Dwarf-kings of old was a golden ring; but all those hoards long ago were 
plundered and the Dragons devoured them, and of the Seven Rings some were 
consumed in fire and some Sauron recovered. 

Men proved easier to ensnare. Those who used the Nine Rings became mighty 
in their day, kings, sorcerers, and warriors of old. They obtained glory and great 
wealth, yet it turned to their undoing. They had, as it seemed, unending life, yet 
life became unendurable to them. They could walk, if they would, unseen by all 
eyes in this world beneath the sun, and they could see things in worlds invisible 
to mortal men; but too often they beheld only the phantoms and delusions of 
Sauron. And one by one, sooner or later, according to their native strength and to 
the good or evil of their wills in the beginning, they fell under the thraldom of 
the ring that they bore and under the domination of the One, which was 
Sauron’s. And they became for ever invisible save to him that wore the Ruling 
Ring, and they entered into the realm of shadows. The Nazgul were they, the 
Ringwraiths, the Enemy’s most terrible servants; darkness went with them, and 
they cried with the voices of death. 

Now Sauron’s lust and pride increased, until he knew no bounds, and he 
determined to make himself master of all things in Middle-earth, and to destroy 
the Elves, and to compass, if he might, the downfall of Numenor. He brooked no 
freedom nor any rivalry, and he named himself Lord of the Earth. A mask he still 
could wear so that if he wished he might deceive the eyes of Men, seeming to 
them wise and fair. But he ruled rather by force and fear, if they might avail; and 
those who perceived his shadow spreading over the world called him the Dark 
Lord and named him the Enemy; and he gathered again under his government all 
the evil things of the days of Morgoth that remained on earth or beneath it, and 
the Ores were at his command and multiplied like flies. Thus the Black Years 
began, which the Elves call the Days of Flight. In that time many of the Elves of 
Middle-earth fled to Lindon and thence over the seas never to return; and many 
were destroyed by Sauron and his servants. But in Lindon Gil-galad still 



maintained his power, and Sauron dared not as yet to pass the Mountains of Ered 
Luin nor to assail the Havens; and Gil-galad was aided by the Numenoreans. 
Elsewhere Sauron reigned, and those who would be free took refuge in the 
fastnesses of wood and mountain, and ever fear pursued them. In the east and 
south well nigh all Men were under his dominion, and they grew strong in those 
days and built many towns and walls of stone, and they were numerous and 
fierce in war and armed with iron. To them Sauron was both king and god; and 
they feared him exceedingly, for he surrounded his abode with fire. 

Yet there came at length a stay in the onslaught of Sauron upon the westlands. 
For, as is told in the Akallabeth, he was challenged by the might of Numenor. So 
great was the power and splendour of the Numenoreans in the noontide of their 
realm that the servants of Sauron would not withstand them, and hoping to 
accomplish by cunning what he could not achieve by force, he left Middle-earth 
for a while and went to Numenor as a hostage of Tar-Calion the King. And there 
he abode, until at the last by his craft he had corrupted the hearts of most of that 
people, and set them at war with the Valar, and so compassed their ruin, as he 
had long desired. But that ruin was more terrible than Sauron had foreseen, for 
he had forgotten the might of the Lords of the West in their anger. The world was 
broken, and the land was swallowed up, and the seas rose over it, and Sauron 
himself went down into the abyss. But his spirit arose and fled back on a dark 
wind to Middle-earth, seeking a home. There he found that the power of Gil- 
galad had grown great in the years of his absence, and it was spread now over 
wide regions of the north and west, and had passed beyond the Misty Mountains 
and the Great River even to the borders of Greenwood the Great, and was 
drawing nigh to the strong places where once he had dwelt secure. Then Sauron 
withdrew to his fortress in the Black Land and meditated war. 

In that time those of the Numenoreans who were saved from destruction fled 
eastward, as is told in the Akallabeth. The chief of these were Elendil the Tall 
and his sons, Isildur and Anarion. Kinsmen of the King they were, descendants 
of Elros, but they had been unwilling to listen to Sauron, and had refused to 
make war on the Lords of the West. Manning their ships with all who remained 
faithful they forsook the land of Numenor ere ruin came upon it. They were 
mighty men and their ships were strong and tall, but the tempests overtook them, 
and they were borne aloft on hills of water even to the clouds, and they 
descended upon Middle-earth like birds of the storm. 

Elendil was cast up by the waves in the land of Lindon, and he was befriended 
by Gil-galad. Thence he passed up the River Lhun, and beyond Ered Luin he 
established his realm, and his people dwelt in many places in Eriador about the 
courses of the Lhun and the Baranduin; but his chief city was at Annuminas 



beside the water of Lake Nenuial. At Fornost upon the North Downs also the 
Numenoreans dwelt, and in Cardolan, and in the hills of Rhudaur; and towers 
they raised upon Emyn Beraid and upon Amon Sul; and there remain many 
barrows and ruined works in those places, but the towers of Emyn Beraid still 
look towards the sea. 

Isildur and Anarion were borne away southwards, and at the last they brought 
their ships up the Great River Anduin, that flows out of Rhovanion into the 
western sea in the Bay of Belfalas; and they established a realm in those lands 
that were after called Gondor, whereas the Northern Kingdom was named Arnor. 
Long before in the days of their power the mariners of Numenor had established 
a haven and strong places about the mouths of Anduin, in despite of Sauron in 
the Black Land that lay nigh upon the east. In the later days to this haven came 
only the Faithful of Numenor, and many therefore of the folk of the coastlands in 
that region were in whole or in part akin to the Elf-friends and the people of 
Elendil, and they welcomed his sons. The chief city of this southern realm was 
Osgiliath, through the midst of which the Great River flowed; and the 
Numenoreans built there a great bridge, upon which there were towers and 
houses of stone wonderful to behold, and tall ships came up out of the sea to the 
quays of the city. Other strong places they built also upon either hand: Minas 
Ithil, the Tower of the Rising Moon, eastward upon a shoulder of the Mountains 
of Shadow as a threat to Mordor; and to the westward Minas Anor, the Tower of 
the Setting Sun, at the feet of Mount Mindolluin, as a shield against the wild 
men of the dales. In Minas Ithil was the house of Isildur, and in Minas Anor the 
house of Anarion, but they shared the realm between them and their thrones 
were set side by side in the Great Hall of Osgiliath. These were the chief 
dwellings of the Numenoreans in Gondor, but other works marvellous and strong 
they built in the land in the days of their power, at the Argonath, and at 
Aglarond, and at Erech; and in the circle of Angrenost, which Men called 
Isengard, they made the Pinnacle of Orthanc of unbreakable stone. 

Many treasures and great heirlooms of virtue and wonder the Exiles had 
brought from Numenor; and of these the most renowned were the Seven Stones 
and the White Tree. The White Tree was grown from the fruit of Nimloth the 
Fair that stood in the courts of the King at Armenelos in Numenor, ere Sauron 
burned it; and Nimloth was in its turn descended from the Tree of Tirion, that 
was an image of the Eldest of Trees, White Telperion which Yavanna caused to 
grow in the land of the Valar. The Tree, memorial of the Eldar and of the light of 
Valinor, was planted in Minas Ithil before the house of Isildur, since he it was 
that had saved the fruit from destruction; but the Stones were divided. 

Three Elendil took, and his sons each two. Those of Elendil were set in towers 



upon Emyn Beraid, and upon Amon Sul, and in the city of Annuminas. But 
those of his sons were at Minas Ithil and Minas Anor, and at Orthanc and in 
Osgiliath. Now these Stones had this virtue that those who looked therein might 
perceive in them things far off, whether in place or in time. For the most part 
they revealed only things near to another kindred Stone, for the Stones each 
called to each; but those who possessed great strength of will and of mind might 
learn to direct their gaze whither they would. Thus the Numenoreans were aware 
of many things that their enemies wished to conceal, and little escaped their 
vigilance in the days of their might. 

It is said that the towers of Emyn Beraid were not built indeed by the Exiles of 
Numenor, but were raised by Gilgalad for Elendil, his friend; and the Seeing 
Stone of Emyn Beraid was set in Elostirion, the tallest of the towers. Thither 
Elendil would repair, and thence he would gaze out over the sundering seas, 
when the yearning of exile was upon him; and it is believed that thus he would at 
whiles see far away even the Tower of Avallone upon Eressea, where the Master- 
stone abode, and yet abides. These stones were gifts of the Eldar to Amandil, 
father of Elendil, for the comfort of the Faithful of Numenor in their dark days, 
when the Elves might come no longer to that land under the shadow of Sauron. 
They were called the Palantiri, those that watch from afar; but all those that were 
brought to Middle-earth long ago were lost. 


Thus the Exiles of Numenor established their realms in Arnor and in Gondor; 
but ere many years had passed it became manifest that their enemy, Sauron, had 
also returned. He came in secret, as has been told, to his ancient kingdom of 
Mordor beyond the Ephel Duath, the Mountains of Shadow, and that country 
marched with Gondor upon the east. There above the valley of Gorgoroth was 
built his fortress vast and strong, Barad-dur, the Dark Tower; and there was a 
fiery mountain in that land that the Elves named Orod-ruin. Indeed for that 
reason Sauron had set there his dwelling long before, for he used the fire that 
welled there from the heart of the earth in his sorceries and in his forging; and in 
the midst of the Land of Mordor he had fashioned the Ruling Ring. There now 
he brooded in the dark, until he had wrought for himself a new shape; and it was 
terrible, for his fair semblance had departed for ever when he was cast into the 
abyss at the drowning of Numenor. He took up again the great Ring and clothed 
himself in power; and the malice of the Eye of Sauron few even of the great 
among Elves and Men could endure. 

Now Sauron prepared war against the Eldar and the Men of Westernesse, and 
the fires of the Mountain were wakened again. Wherefore seeing the smoke of 



Orodruin from afar, and perceiving that Sauron had returned, the Numenoreans 
named that mountain anew Amon Amarth, which is Mount Doom. And Sauron 
gathered to him great strength of his servants out of the east and the south; and 
among them were not a few of the high race of Numenor. For in the days of the 
sojourn of Sauron in that land the hearts of well nigh all its people had been 
turned towards darkness. Therefore many of those who sailed east in that time 
and made fortresses and dwellings upon the coasts were already bent to his will, 
and they served him still gladly in Middle-earth. But because of the power of 
Gil-galad these renegades, lords both mighty and evil, for the most part took up 
their abodes in the southlands far away; yet two there were, Herumor and Fuinur, 
who rose to power among the Haradrim, a great and cruel people that dwelt in 
the wide lands south of Mordor beyond the mouths of Anduin. 

When therefore Sauron saw his time he came with great force against the new 
realm of Gondor, and he took Minas Ithil, and he destroyed the White Tree of 
Isildur that grew there. But Isildur escaped, and taking with him a seedling of the 
Tree he went with his wife and his sons by ship down the River, and they sailed 
from the mouths of Anduin seeking Elendil. Meanwhile Anarion held Osgiliath 
against the Enemy, and for that time drove him back to the mountains; but 
Sauron gathered his strength again, and Anarion knew that unless help should 
come his kingdom would not long stand. 

Now Elendil and Gil-galad took counsel together, for they perceived that 
Sauron would grow too strong and would overcome all his enemies one by one, 
if they did not unite against him. Therefore they made that League which is 
called the Last Alliance, and they marched east into Middle-earth gathering a 
great host of Elves and Men; and they halted for a while at Imladris. It is said 
that the host that was there assembled was fairer and more splendid in arms than 
any that has since been seen in Middle-earth, and none greater has been 
mustered since the host of the Valar went against Thangorodrim. 

From Imladris they crossed the Misty Mountains by many passes and marched 
down the River Anduin, and so came at last upon the host of Sauron on 
Dagorlad, the Battle Plain, which lies before the gate of the Black Land. All 
living things were divided in that day, and some of every kind, even of beasts 
and birds, were found in either host, save the Elves only. They alone were 
undivided and followed Gil-galad. Of the Dwarves few fought upon either side; 
but the kindred of Durin of Moria fought against Sauron. 

The host of Gil-galad and Elendil had the victory, for the might of the Elves 
was still great in those days, and the Numenoreans were strong and tall, and 
terrible in their wrath. Against Aeglos the spear of Gil-galad none could stand; 
and the sword of Elendil filled Ores and Men with fear, for it shone with the 



light of the sun and of the moon, and it was named Narsil. 

Then Gil-galad and Elendil passed into Mordor and encompassed the 
stronghold of Sauron; and they laid siege to it for seven years, and suffered 
grievous loss by fire and by the darts and bolts of the Enemy, and Sauron sent 
many sorties against them. There in the valley of Gorgoroth Anarion son of 
Elendil was slain, and many others. But at the last the siege was so strait that 
Sauron himself came forth; and he wrestled with Gil-galad and Elendil, and they 
both were slain, and the sword of Elendil broke under him as he fell. But Sauron 
also was thrown down, and with the hilt-shard of Narsil Isildur cut the Ruling 
Ring from the hand of Sauron and took it for his own. Then Sauron was for that 
time vanquished, and he forsook his body, and his spirit fled far away and hid in 
waste places; and he took no visible shape again for many long years. 


Thus began the Third Age of the World, after the Eldest Days and the Black 
Years; and there was still hope in that time and the memory of mirth, and for 
long the White Tree of the Eldar flowered in the courts of the Kings of Men, for 
the seedling which he had saved Isildur planted in the citadel of Anor in memory 
of his brother, ere he departed from Gondor. The servants of Sauron were routed 
and dispersed, yet they were not wholly destroyed; and though many Men turned 
now from evil and became subject to the heirs of Elendil, yet many more 
remembered Sauron in their hearts and hated the kingdoms of the West. The 
Dark Tower was levelled to the ground, yet its foundations remained, and it was 
not forgotten. The Numenoreans indeed set a guard upon the land of Mordor, but 
none dared dwell there because of the terror of the memory of Sauron, and 
because of the Mountain of Fire that stood nigh to Barad-dur; and the valley of 
Gorgoroth was filled with ash. Many of the Elves and many of the Numenoreans 
and of Men who were their allies had perished in the Battle and the Siege; and 
Elendil the Tall and Gil-galad the High King were no more. Never again was 
such a host assembled, nor was there any such league of Elves and Men; for after 
Elendil’s day the two kindreds became estranged. 

The Ruling Ring passed out of the knowledge even of the Wise in that age; yet 
it was not unmade. For Isildur would not surrender it to Elrond and Cirdan who 
stood by. They counselled him to cast it into the fire of Orodruin nigh at hand, in 
which it had been forged, so that it should perish, and the power of Sauron be for 
ever diminished, and he should remain only as a shadow of malice in the 
wilderness. But Isildur refused this counsel, saying: This I will have as weregild 
for my father’s death, and my brother’s. Was it not I that dealt the Enemy his 
death-blow?’ And the Ring that he held seemed to him exceedingly fair to look 



on; and he would not suffer it to be destroyed. Taking it therefore he returned at 
first to Minas Anor, and there planted the White Tree in memory of his brother 
Anarion. But soon he departed, and after he had given counsel to Meneldil, his 
brother’s son, and had committed to him the realm of the south, he bore away the 
Ring, to be an heirloom of his house, and marched north from Gondor by the 
way that Elendil had come; and he forsook the South Kingdom, for he purposed 
to take up his father’s realm in Eriador, far from the shadow of the Black Land. 

But Isildur was overwhelmed by a host of Ores that lay in wait in the Misty 
Mountains; and they descended upon him at unawares in his camp between the 
Greenwood and the Great River, nigh to Loeg Ningloron, the Gladden Fields, for 
he was heedless and set no guard, deeming that all his foes were overthrown. 
There well nigh all his people were slain, and among them were his three elder 
sons, Elendur, Aratan, and Ciryon; but his wife and his youngest son, Valandil, 
he had left in Imladris when he went to the war. Isildur himself escaped by 
means of the Ring, for when he wore it he was invisible to all eyes; but the Ores 
hunted him by scent and slot, until he came to the River and plunged in. There 
the Ring betrayed him and avenged its maker, for it slipped from his finger as he 
swam, and it was lost in the water. Then the Ores saw him as he laboured in the 
stream, and they shot him with many arrows, and that was his end. Only three of 
his people came ever back over the mountains after long wandering; and of these 
one was Ohtar his esquire, to whose keeping he had given the shards of the 
sword of Elendil. 

Thus Narsil came in due time to the hand of Valandil, Isildur’s heir, in 
Imladris; but the blade was broken and its light was extinguished, and it was not 
forged anew. And Master Elrond foretold that this would not be done until the 
Ruling Ring should be found again and Sauron should return; but the hope of 
Elves and Men was that these things might never come to pass. 

Valandil took up his abode in Annuminas, but his folk were diminished, and 
of the Numenoreans and of the Men of Eriador there remained now too few to 
people the land or to maintain all the places that Elendil had built; in Dagorlad, 
and in Mordor, and upon the Gladden Fields many had fallen. And it came to 
pass after the days of Earendur, the seventh king that followed Valandil, that the 
Men of Westernesse, the Dunedain of the North, became divided into petty 
realms and lordships, and their foes devoured them one by one. Ever they 
dwindled with the years, until their glory passed, leaving only green mounds in 
the grass. At length naught was left of them but a strange people wandering 
secretly in the wild, and other men knew not their homes nor the purpose of their 
journeys, and save in Imladris, in the house of Elrond, their ancestry was 
forgotten. Yet the shards of the sword were cherished during many lives of Men 



by the heirs of Isildur; and their line, from father to son, remained unbroken. 

In the south the realm of Gondor endured, and for a time its splendour grew, 
until it recalled the wealth and majesty of Numenor ere it fell. High towers the 
people of Gondor built, and strong places, and havens of many ships; and the 
Winged Crown of the Kings of Men was held in awe by people of many lands 
and tongues. For many a year the White Tree grew before the King’s house in 
Minas Anor, the seed of that tree which Isildur brought out of the deeps of the 
sea from Numenor; and the seed before that came from Avallone, and before that 
from Valinor in the Day before days when the world was young. 

Yet at the last, in the wearing of the swift years of Middle-earth, Gondor 
waned, and the line of Meneldil son of Anarion failed. For the blood of the 
Numenoreans became much mingled with that of other men, and their power and 
wisdom was diminished, and their life-span was shortened, and the watch upon 
Mordor slumbered. And in the days of Telemnar, the third and twentieth of the 
line of Meneldil, a plague came upon dark winds out of the east, and it smote the 
King and his children, and many of the people of Gondor perished. Then the 
forts on the borders of Mordor were deserted, and Minas Ithil was emptied of its 
people; and evil entered again into the Black Land secretly, and the ashes of 
Gorgoroth were stirred as by a cold wind, for dark shapes gathered there. It is 
said that these were indeed theUlairi, whom Sauron called the Nazgul, the Nine 
Ringwraiths that had long remained hidden, but returned now to prepare the 
ways of their Master, for he had begun to grow again. 

And in the days of Earnil they made their first stroke, and they came by night 
out of Mordor over the passes of the Mountains of Shadow, and took Minas Ithil 
for their abode; and they made it a place of such dread that none dared to look 
upon it. Thereafter it was called Minas Morgul, the Tower of Sorcery; and Minas 
Morgul was ever at war with Minas Anor in the west. Then Osgiliath, which in 
the waning of the people had long been deserted, became a place of ruins and a 
city of ghosts. But Minas Anor endured, and it was named anew Minas Tirith, 
the Tower of Guard; for there the kings caused to be built in the citadel a white 
tower, very tall and fair, and its eye was upon many lands. Proud still and strong 
was that city, and in it the White Tree still flowered for a while before the house 
of the Kings; and there the remnant of the Numenoreans still defended the 
passage of the River against the terrors of Minas Morgul and against all the 
enemies of the West, Ores and monsters and evil Men; and thus the lands behind 
them, west of Anduin, were protected from war and destruction. 

Still Minas Tirith endured after the days of Earnur, son of Earnil, and the last 
King of Gondor. He it was that rode alone to the gates of Minas Morgul to meet 
the challenge of the Morgul-lord; and he met him in single combat, but he was 



betrayed by the Nazgul and taken alive into the city of torment, and no living 
man saw him ever again. Now Earnur left no heir, but when the line of the Kings 
failed the Stewards of the house of Mardil the Faithful ruled the city and its ever- 
shrinking realm; and the Rohirrim, the Horsemen of the North, came and dwelt 
in the green land of Rohan, which before was named Calenardhon and was a part 
of the kingdom of Gondor; and the Rohirrim aided the Lords of the City in their 
wars. And northward, beyond the Falls of Rauros and the Gates of Argonath, 
there were as yet other defences, powers more ancient of which Men knew little, 
against whom the things of evil did not dare to move, until in the ripening of 
time their dark lord, Sauron, should come forth again. And until that time was 
come, never again after the days of Earnil did the Nazgul dare to cross the River 
or to come forth from their city in shape visible to Men. 


In all the days of the Third Age, after the fall of Gil-galad, Master Elrond 
abode in Imladris, and he gathered there many Elves, and other folk of wisdom 
and power from among all the kindreds of Middle-earth, and he preserved 
through many lives of Men the memory of all that had been fair; and the house 
of Elrond was a refuge for the weary and the oppressed, and a treasury of good 
counsel and wise lore. In that house were harboured the Heirs of Isildur, in 
childhood and old age, because of the kinship of their blood with Elrond himself, 
and because he knew in his wisdom that one should come of their line to whom a 
great part was appointed in the last deeds of that Age. And until that time came 
the shards of Elendil’s sword were given into the keeping of Elrond, when the 
days of the Dunedain darkened and they became a wandering people. 

In Eriador Imladris was the chief dwelling of the High Elves; but at the Grey 
Havens of Lindon there abode also a remnant of the people of Gil-galad the 
Elvenking. At times they would wander into the lands of Eriador, but for the 
most part they dwelt near the shores of the sea, building and tending the elven- 
ships wherein those of the Firstborn who grew weary of the world set sail into 
the uttermost West. Cirdan the Shipwright was lord of the Havens and mighty 
among the Wise. 

Of the Three Rings that the Elves had preserved unsullied no open word was 
ever spoken among the Wise, and few even of the Eldar knew where they were 
bestowed. Yet after the fall of Sauron their power was ever at work, and where 
they abode there mirth also dwelt and all things were unstained by the griefs of 
time. Therefore ere the Third Age was ended the Elves perceived that the Ring 
of Sapphire was with Elrond, in the fair valley of Rivendell, upon whose house 
the stars of heaven most brightly shone; whereas the Ring of Adamant was in the 



Land of Lorien where dwelt the Lady Galadriel. A queen she was of the 
woodland Elves, the wife of Celeborn of Doriath, yet she herself was of the 
Noldor and remembered the Day before days in Valinor, and she was the 
mightiest and fairest of all the Elves that remained in Middle-earth. But the Red 
Ring remained hidden until the end, and none save Elrond and Galadriel and 
Cirdan knew to whom it had been committed. 

Thus it was that in two domains the bliss and beauty of the Elves remained 
still undiminished while that Age endured: in Imladris; and in Lothlorien, the 
hidden land between Celebrant and Anduin, where the trees bore flowers of gold 
and no Ore or evil thing dared ever come. Yet many voices were heard among 
the Elves foreboding that, if Sauron should come again, then either he would 
find the Ruling Ring that was lost, or at the best his enemies would discover it 
and destroy it; but in either chance the powers of the Three must then fail and all 
things maintained by them must fade, and so the Elves should pass into the 
twilight and the Dominion of Men begin. 

And so indeed it has since befallen: the One and the Seven and the Nine are 
destroyed; and the Three have passed away, and with them the Third Age is 
ended, and the Tales of the Eldar in Middle-earth draw to their close. Those were 
the Fading Years, and in them the last flowering of the Elves east of the Sea 
came to its winter. In that time the Noldor walked still in the Hither Lands, 
mightiest and fairest of the children of the world, and their tongues were still 
heard by mortal ears. Many things of beauty and wonder remained on earth in 
that time, and many things also of evil and dread: Ores there were and trolls and 
dragons and fell beasts, and strange creatures old and wise in the woods whose 
names are forgotten; Dwarves still laboured in the hills and wrought with patient 
craft works of metal and stone that none now can rival. But the Dominion of 
Men was preparing and all things were changing, until at last the Dark Lord 
arose in Mirkwood again. 

Now of old the name of that forest was Greenwood the Great, and its wide 
halls and aisles were the haunt of many beasts and of birds of bright song; and 
there was the realm of King Thranduil under the oak and the beech. But after 
many years, when well nigh a third of that age of the world had passed, a 
darkness crept slowly through the wood from the southward, and fear walked 
there in shadowy glades; fell beasts came hunting, and cruel and evil creatures 
laid there their snares. 

Then the name of the forest was changed and Mirkwood it was called, for the 
nightshade lay deep there, and few dared to pass through, save only in the north 
where ThranduiTs people still held the evil at bay. Whence it came few could 
tell, and it was long ere even the Wise could discover it. It was the shadow of 



Sauron and the sign of his return. For coming out of the wastes of the East he 
took up his abode in the south of the forest, and slowly he grew and took shape 
there again; in a dark hill he made his dwelling and wrought there his sorcery, 
and all folk feared the Sorcerer of Dol Guldur, and yet they knew not at first how 
great was their peril. 

Even as the first shadows were felt in Mirkwood there appeared in the west of 
Middle-earth the Istari, whom Men called the Wizards. None knew at that time 
whence they were, save Cirdan of the Havens, and only to Elrond and to 
Galadriel did he reveal that they came over the Sea. But afterwards it was said 
among the Elves that they were messengers sent by the Lords of the West to 
contest the power of Sauron, if he should arise again, and to move Elves and 
Men and all living things of good will to valiant deeds. In the likeness of Men 
they appeared, old but vigorous, and they changed little with the years, and aged 
but slowly, though great cares lay on them; great wisdom they had, and many 
powers of mind and hand. Long they journeyed far and wide among Elves and 
Men, and held converse also with beasts and with birds; and the peoples of 
Middle-earth gave to them many names, for their tme names they did not reveal. 
Chief among them were those whom the Elves called Mithrandir and Curunir, 
but Men in the North named Gandalf and Saruman. Of these Curunir was the 
eldest and came first, and after him came Mithrandir and Radagast, and others of 
the Istari who went into the east of Middle-earth, and do not come into these 
tales. Radagast was the friend of all beasts and birds; but Curunir went most 
among Men, and he was subtle in speech and skilled in all the devices of 
smithcraft. Mithrandir was closest in counsel with Elrond and the Elves. He 
wandered far in the North and West and made never in any land any lasting 
abode; but Curunir journeyed into the East, and when he returned he dwelt at 
Orthanc in the Ring of Isengard, which the Numenoreans made in the days of 
their power. 

Ever most vigilant was Mithrandir, and he it was that most doubted the 
darkness in Mirkwood, for though many deemed that it was wrought by the 
Ringwraiths, he feared that it was indeed the first shadow of Sauron returning; 
and he went to Dol Guldur, and the Sorcerer fled from him, and there was a 
watchful peace for a long while. But at length the Shadow returned and its power 
increased; and in that time was first made the Council of the Wise that is called 
the White Council, and therein were Elrond and Galadriel and Cirdan, and other 
lords of the Eldar, and with them were Mithrandir and Curunir. And Curunir 
(that was Saruman the White) was chosen to be their chief, for he had most 
studied the devices of Sauron of old. Galadriel indeed had wished that 
Mithrandir should be the head of the Council, and Saruman begrudged them that, 



for his pride and desire of mastery was grown great; but Mithrandir refused the 
office, since he would have no ties and no allegiance, save to those who sent 
him, and he would abide in no place nor be subject to any summons. But 
Saruman now began to study the lore of the Rings of Power, their making and 
their history. 

Now the Shadow grew ever greater, and the hearts of Elrond and Mithrandir 
darkened. Therefore on a time Mithrandir at great peril went again to Dol Guldur 
and the pits of the Sorcerer, and he discovered the truth of his fears, and escaped. 
And returning to Elrond he said: 

True, alas, is our guess. This is not one of theUlairi, as many have long 
supposed. It is Sauron himself who has taken shape again and now grows apace; 
and he is gathering again all the Rings to his hand; and he seeks ever for news of 
the One, and of the Heirs of Isildur, if they live still on earth.’ 

And Elrond answered: Tn the hour that Isildur took the Ring and would not 
surrender it, this doom was wrought, that Sauron should return.’ 

‘Yet the One was lost,’ said Mithrandir, ‘and while it still lies hid, we can 
master the Enemy, if we gather our strength and tarry not too long.’ 

Then the White Council was summoned; and Mithrandir urged them to swift 
deeds, but Curunir spoke against him, and counselled them to wait yet and to 
watch. 

‘For I believe not,’ said he, ‘that the One will ever be found again in Middle- 
earth. Into Anduin it fell, and long ago, I deem, it was rolled to the Sea. There it 
shall lie until the end, when all this world is broken and the deeps are removed.’ 

Therefore naught was done at that time, though Elrond’s heart misgave him, 
and he said to Mithrandir: ‘Nonetheless I forebode that the One will yet be 
found, and then war will arise again, and in that war this Age will be ended. 
Indeed in a second darkness it will end, unless some strange chance deliver us 
that my eyes cannot see.’ 

‘Many are the strange chances of the world,’ said Mithrandir, ‘and help oft 
shall come from the hands of the weak when the Wise falter.’ 

Thus the Wise were troubled, but none as yet perceived that Curunir had 
turned to dark thoughts and was already a traitor in heart: for he desired that he 
and no other should find the Great Ring, so that he might wield it himself and 
order all the world to his will. Too long he had studied the ways of Sauron in 
hope to defeat him, and now he envied him as a rival rather than hated his works. 
And he deemed that the Ring, which was Sauron’s, would seek for its master as 
he became manifest once more; but if he were driven out again, then it would lie 
hid. Therefore he was willing to play with peril and let Sauron be for a time, 
hoping by his craft to forestall both his friends and the Enemy, when the Ring 



should appear. 

He set a watch upon the Gladden Fields; but soon he discovered that the 
servants of Dol Guldur were searching all the ways of the River in that region. 
Then he perceived that Sauron also had learned of the manner of Isildur’s end, 
and he grew afraid and withdrew to Isengard and fortified it; and ever he probed 
deeper into the lore of the Rings of Power and the art of their forging. But he 
spoke of none of this to the Council, hoping still that he might be the first to hear 
news of the Ring. He gathered a great host of spies, and many of these were 
birds; for Radagast lent him his aid, divining naught of his treachery, and 
deeming that this was but part of the watch upon the Enemy. 

But ever the shadow in Mirkwood grew deeper, and to Dol Guldur evil things 
repaired out of all the dark places of the world; and they were united again under 
one will, and their malice was directed against the Elves and the survivors of 
Numenor. Therefore at last the Council was again summoned and the lore of the 
Rings was much debated; but Mithrandir spoke to the Council, saying: 

‘It is not needed that the Ring should be found, for while it abides on earth 
and is not unmade, still the power that it holds will live, and Sauron will grow 
and have hope. The might of the Elves and the Elf-friends is less now than of 
old. Soon he will be too strong for you, even without the Great Ring; for he rules 
the Nine, and of the Seven he has recovered three. We must strike.’ 

To this Curunir now assented, desiring that Sauron should be thrust from Dol 
Guldur, which was nigh to the River, and should have leisure to search there no 
longer. Therefore, for the last time, he aided the Council, and they put forth their 
strength; and they assailed Dol Guldur, and drove Sauron from his hold, and 
Mirkwood for a brief while was made wholesome again. 

But their stroke was too late. For the Dark Lord had foreseen it, and he had 
long prepared all his movements; and the Ulairi, his Nine Servants, had gone 
before him to make ready for his coming. Therefore his flight was but a feint, 
and he soon returned, and ere the Wise could prevent him he re-entered his 
kingdom in Mordor and reared once again the dark towers of Barad-dur. And in 
that year the White Council met for the last time, and Curunir withdrew to 
Isengard, and took counsel with none save himself. 

Ores were mustering, and far to the east and the south the wild peoples were 
arming. Then in the midst of gathering fear and the rumour of war the 
foreboding of Elrond was proved true, and the One Ring was indeed found 
again, by a chance more strange than even Mithrandir had foreseen; and it was 
hidden from Curunir and from Sauron. For it had been taken from Anduin long 
ere they sought for it, being found by one of the small fisher-folk that dwelt by 
the River, ere the Kings failed in Gondor; and by its finder it was brought 



beyond search into dark hiding under the roots of the mountains. There it dwelt, 
until even in the year of the assault upon Dol Guldur it was found again, by a 
wayfarer, fleeing into the depths of the earth from the pursuit of the Ores, and 
passed into a far distant country, even to the land of the Periannath, the Little 
People, the Halflings, who dwelt in the west of Eriador. And ere that day they 
had been held of small account by Elves and by Men, and neither Sauron nor any 
of the Wise save Mithrandir had in all their counsels given thought to them. 

Now by fortune and his vigilance Mithrandir first learned of the Ring, ere 
Sauron had news of it; yet he was dismayed and in doubt. For too great was the 
evil power of this thing for any of the Wise to wield, unless like Curunir he 
wished himself to become a tyrant and a dark lord in his turn; but neither could it 
be concealed from Sauron for ever, nor could it be unmade by the craft of the 
Elves. Therefore with the help of the Diinedain of the North Mithrandir set a 
watch upon the land of the Periannath and bided his time. But Sauron had many 
ears, and soon he heard rumour of the One Ring, which above all things he 
desired, and he sent forth the Nazgul to take it. Then war was kindled, and in 
battle with Sauron the Third Age ended even as it had begun. 


But those who saw the things that were done in that time, deeds of valour and 
wonder, have elsewhere told the tale of the War of the Ring, and how it ended 
both in victory unlooked for and in sorrow long foreseen. Here let it be said that 
in those days the Heir of Isildur arose in the North, and he took the shards of the 
sword of Elendil, and in Imladris they were reforged; and he went then to war, a 
great captain of Men. He was Aragorn son of Arathorn, the nine and thirtieth 
heir in the right line from Isildur, and yet more like to Elendil than any before 
him. Battle there was in Rohan, and Curunir the traitor was thrown down and 
Isengard broken; and before the City of Gondor a great field was fought, and the 
Lord of Morgul, Captain of Sauron, there passed into darkness; and the Heir of 
Isildur led the host of the West to the Black Gates of Mordor. 

In that last battle were Mithrandir, and the sons of Elrond, and the King of 
Rohan, and lords of Gondor, and the Heir of Isildur with the Dunedain of the 
North. There at the last they looked upon death and defeat, and all their valour 
was in vain; for Sauron was too strong. Yet in that hour was put to the proof that 
which Mithrandir had spoken, and help came from the hands of the weak when 
the Wise faltered. For, as many songs have since sung, it was the Periannath, the 
Little People, dwellers in hillsides and meadows, that brought them deliverance. 

For Frodo the Halfling, it is said, at the bidding of Mithrandir took on himself 
the burden, and alone with his servant he passed through peril and darkness and 



came at last in Sauron’s despite even to Mount Doom; and there into the Fire 
where it was wrought he cast the Great Ring of Power, and so at last it was 
unmade and its evil consumed. 

Then Sauron failed, and he was utterly vanquished and passed away like a 
shadow of malice; and the towers of Baraddur crumbled in ruin, and at the 
rumour of their fall many lands trembled. Thus peace came again, and a new 
Spring opened on earth; and the Heir of Isildur was crowned King of Gondor 
and Arnor, and the might of the Dunedain was lifted up and their glory renewed. 
In the courts of Minas Anor the White Tree flowered again, for a seedling was 
found by Mithrandir in the snows of Mindolluin that rose tall and white above 
the City of Gondor; and while it still grew there the Elder Days were not wholly 
forgotten in the hearts of the Kings. 















Now all these things were achieved for the most part by the counsel and 
vigilance of Mithrandir, and in the last few days he was revealed as a lord of 
great reverence, and clad in white he rode into battle; but not until the time came 
for him to depart was it known that he had long guarded the Red Ring of Fire. At 
the first that Ring had been entrusted to Cirdan, Lord of the Havens; but he had 
surrendered it to Mithrandir, for he knew whence he came and whither at last he 
would return. 

Take now this Ring,’ he said; 'for thy labours and thy cares will be heavy, but 
in all it will support thee and defend thee from weariness. For this is the Ring of 
Fire, and herewith, maybe, thou shalt rekindle hearts to the valour of old in a 
world that grows chill. But as for me, my heart is with the Sea, and I will dwell 
by the grey shores, guarding the Havens until the last ship sails. Then I shall 
await thee.’ 

White was that ship and long was it a-building, and long it awaited the end of 
which Cirdan had spoken. But when all these things were done, and the Heir of 
Isildur had taken up the lordship of Men, and the dominion of the West had 
passed to him, then it was made plain that the power of the Three Rings also was 
ended, and to the Firstborn the world grew old and grey. In that time the last of 
the Noldor set sail from the Havens and left Middle-earth for ever. And latest of 
all the Keepers of the Three Rings rode to the Sea, and Master Elrond took there 
the ship that Cirdan had made ready. In the twilight of autumn it sailed out of 
Mithlond, until the seas of the Bent World fell away beneath it, and the winds of 
the round sky troubled it no more, and borne upon the high airs above the mists 
of the world it passed into the Ancient West, and an end was come for the Eldar 
of story and of song. 



X 







L 





1 

a 









NOTF. ON PRONUNCIATION 


The following note is intended simply to clarify a few main features in the 

pronunciation of names in the Elvish languages, and is by no means exhaustive. 

For full information on the subject see The Lord of the Rings Appendix E. 

CONSONANTS 

C always has the value of k, never of s; thus Celeborn is ‘Keleborn’, not 
‘Seleborn’. In a few cases, as Tulkas, Kementari a k has been used in the 
spelling in this book. 

CH always has the value of ch in Scotch loch or German buch, never that of ch 
in English church. Examples are Carcharoth, Erchamion. 

DH is always used to represent the sound of a voiced (‘soft’) th in English, that 
is the th in then, not the th in thin. Examples are Maedhros, Aredhel, 
Haudh-en-Arwen. 

G always has the sound of English g in get; thus Region, Eregion are not 
pronounced like English region, and the first syllable of Ginglith is as in 
English begin, not as in gin. 

Consonants written twice are pronounced long; thus Yavanna has the long n 

heard in English unnamed, penknife, not the short n in unaimed, penny. 

VOWELS 

AI has the sound of English eye; thus the second syllable of Edain is like 
English dine, not Dane. 

AU has the value of English ow in town; thus the first syllable of Aule is like 
English owl, and the first syllable of Sauron is like English sour, not sore. 

El as in Teiglin has the sound of English grey. 

IE should not be pronounced as in English piece, but with both the vowels i 
and e sounded, and run together; thus Ni-enna, not ‘Neena’. 

UI as in Uinen has the sound of English ruin. 

AE as in Aegnor, Nirnaeth, and OE as in Noegyth, Loeg, are combinations of 
the individual vowels, a-e, o-e, but ae may be pronounced in the same way 
as ai, and oe as in English toy. 

EA are not run together, but constitute two syllables; these combinations are 



and written ea and eo (or, when they begin names, Ed and £o: Earendil, 

EO Ednxve). 

U in names like Hurin, Turin, Tuna should be pronounced oo; thus ‘Toorin’, 
not ‘Tyoorin’. 

ER, before a consonant (as in Nerdanel, Cvrdan, Gurthang ) or at the end of a 
IR, word (as in Amur) should not be pronounced as in English fern, fir, fur, but 
UR as in English air, eer, oor. 

E at the end of words is always pronounced as a distinct vowel, and in this 
position is written e. It is likewise always pronounced in the middle of 
words like Celeborn, Menegroth. 

A circumflex accent in stressed monosyllables in Sindarin denotes the 
particularly long vowel heard in such words (thus Hm Hurin); but in Adunaic 
(Numenorean) and Khuzdul (Dwarvish) names the circumflex is simply used to 
denote long vowels. 



INDF.X OF NAMES 


Since the number of names in the book is very large, this index provides, in 
addition to page-references, a short statement concerning each person and place. 
These statements are not epitomes of all that is said in the text, and for most of 
the central figures in the narrative are kept extremely brief; but such an index is 
inevitably bulky, and I have reduced its size in various ways. 

The chief of these concerns the fact that very often the English translation of 
an Elvish name is also used as the name independently; thus for example the 
dwelling of King Thingol is called both Menegroth and The Thousand Caves’ 
(and also both together). In most such cases I have combined the Elvish name 
and its translated meaning under one entry, with the result that the page- 
references are not restricted to the name that appears as the heading (e.g., those 
under Echoriath include those to ‘Encircling Mountains’). The English 
renderings are given separate headings, but only with a simple direction to the 
main entry, and only if they occur independently. Words in inverted commas are 
translations; many of these occur in the text (as Tol Eressea The Lonely Isle’), 
but I have added a great many others. Information about some names that are not 
translated is contained in the Appendix. 

With the many titles and formal expressions in English whose Elvish originals 
are not given, such as The Elder King’ and The Two Kindreds’, I have been 
selective, but the great majority are registered. The references are in intention 
complete (and sometimes include pages where the subject of the entry occurs but 
is not actually mentioned by name) except in a very few cases where the name 
occurs very frequently indeed, as Beleriand, Valar. Here the word passim is 
used, but selected references are given to important passages; and in the entries 
for some of the Noldorin princes the many occurrences of the name that relate 
only to their sons or their houses have been eliminated. 

References to The Lord of the Rings are by title of the volume, book, and 
chapter. 

Adanedhel ‘Elf-Man’, name given to Turin in Nargothrond. 

Adunakhor ‘Lord of the West’, name taken by the twentieth King of 
Numenor, the first to do so in the Adunaic (Numenorean) tongue; his name 
in Quenya was Herunumen. 



Adurant The sixth and most southerly of the tributaries of Gelion in 
Ossiriand. The name means ‘double stream’, referring to its divided course 
about the island of Tol Galen. 

Aeglos ‘Snow-point’, the spear of Gil-galad. 

Aegnor The fourth son of Finarfin, who with his brother Angrod held the 
northern slopes of Dorthonion; slain in the Dagor Bragollach. The name 
means ‘Fell Fire’. 

Aelin-uial ‘Meres of Twilight’, where Aros flowed into Sirion. 

Aerandir ‘Sea-wanderer’, one of the three mariners who accompanied 
Earendil on his voyages. 

Aerin A kinswoman of Hurin in Dor-lomin; taken as wife by Brodda the 
Easterling; aided Morwen after the Nirnaeth Arnoediad. 

Aftercomers The Younger Children of Iluvatar, Men; translation of Hildor. 
Agarwaen ‘Blood-stained’, name given to himself by Turin when he came 
to Nargothrond. 

Aglarond ‘The Glittering Cavern’ of Helm’s Deep in Ered Nimrais (see The 
Two Towers III 8). 

Aglon ‘The Narrow Pass’, between Dorthonion and the heights to the west 
of Himring. 

Ainulindale ‘The Music of the Ainur’, also called The (Great) Music, The 
(Great) Song. Also the name of the account of Creation said to have been 
composed by Rumil of Tirion in the Elder Days. 

Amur ‘The Holy Ones’ (singular Ainu); the first beings created by Iluvatar, 
the ‘order’ of the Valar and Maiar, made before Ea. 

Akallabeth ‘The Downfallen’, Adunaic (Numenorean) word equivalent in 
meaning to Quenya Atalante. Also the title of the account of the Downfall 
of Numenor. 

Alcarinque ‘The Glorious’, name of a star. 

Alcarondas The great ship of Ar-Pharazon in which he sailed to Aman. 
Aldaron ‘Lord of Trees’, a Quenya name of the Vala Orome; cf. Tauron. 
Aldudenie ‘Lament for the Two Trees’, made by a Vanyarin Elf named 
Elemmire. 

Almaren The first abode of the Valar in Arda, before the second onslaught 
of Melkor: an isle in a great lake in the midst of Middle-earth. 

Alqualonde ‘Haven of the Swans’, the chief city and haven of the Teleri on 
the shores of Aman. 

Aman ‘Biessed, free from evil’, the name of the land in the West, beyond 
the Great Sea, in which the Valar dwelt after they had left the Isle of 
Almaren. Often referred to as the Blessed Realm. Passim. 



Amandil 'Lover of Arrian’; the last lord of Andunie in Numenor, descendant 
of Elros and father of Elendil; set out on a voyage to Valinor and did not 
return. 

Amarie Vanyarin Elf, beloved of Finrod Felagund, who remained in 
Valinor. 

Amlach Son of Imlach son of Marach; a leader of dissension among the 
Men of Estolad who, repenting, took service with Maedhros. 

Amon Amarth 'Mount Doom’, the name given to Orodruin when its fires 
awoke again after Sauron’s return from Numenor. 

Amon Ereb 'The Lonely Hill’ (also simply Ereb ), between Ramdal and the 
river Gelion in East Beleriand. 

Amon Ethir 'The Hill of Spies’, raised by Finrod Felagund to the east of the 
doors of Nargothrond. 

Amon Gwareth The hill upon which Gondolin was built, in the midst of the 
plain of Tumladen. 

Amon Obel A hill in the midst of the Forest of Brethil, on which was built 
Ephel Brandir. 

Amon Rudh ‘The Bald Hill’, a lonely height in the lands south of Brethil; 
abode of Mim, and lair of Turin’s outlaw band. 

Amon Sul ‘Hill of the Wind’, in the Kingdom of Arnor (‘Weathertop’ in The 
Lord of the Rings). 

Amon Uilos Sindarin name of Oiolosse. 

Amras Twin-brother of Amrod, youngest of the sons of Feanor; slain with 
Amrod in the attack on Earendil’s people at the Mouths of Sirion. 

Amrod See Amras. 

Anach Pass leading down from Taur-nu-Fuin (Dorthonion) at the western 
end of Ered Gorgoroth. 

Anadune ‘Westernesse’: name of Numenor in the Adunaic (Numenorean) 
tongue (see Numenor). 

Anar Quenya name of the Sun. 

Anarion Younger son of Elendil, who with his father and his brother Isildur 
escaped from the Drowning of Numenor and founded in Middle-earth the 
Numenorean realms in exile; lord of Minas Anor; slain in the siege of 
Barad-dur. 

Anarrima Name of a constellation. 

Ancalagon Greatest of the winged dragons of Morgoth, destroyed by 
Earendil. 

Andor 'The Land of Gift’: Numenor. 

Andram 'The Long Wall’, name of the dividing fall running across 



Beleriand. 

Androth Caves in the hills of Mithrim where Tuor was fostered by the Grey- 
elves. 

Anduin The Long River’, east of the Misty Mountains; referred to also as 
the Great River and the River. 

Andunie City and haven on the west coast of Numenor. 

Anfauglir A name of the wolf Carcharoth, translated in the text as ‘Jaws of 
Thirst’. 

Anfauglith Name of the plain of Ard-galen after its desolation by Morgoth 
in the Battle of Sudden Flame; translated in the text as ‘the Gasping Dust’. 
Cf. Dor-nu-Fauglith. 

Angainor The chain wrought by Aule with which Melkor was twice bound. 
Angband ‘Iron Prison, Hell of Iron’, the great dungeon-fortress of Morgoth 
in the Northwest of Middle-earth. The Siege of Angband. 

Anghabar ‘Iron-delvings’, a mine in the Encircling Mountains about the 
plain of Gondolin. 

Anglachel The sword made from meteoritic iron that Thingol received from 
Eol and which he gave to Beleg; after its reforging for Turin named 
Gurthang. 

Angrenost ‘Iron Fortress’, Numenorean fortress on the west borders of 
Gondor, afterwards inhabited by the wizard Curunir (Saruman); see 
Isengard. 

Angrim Father of Gorlim the Unhappy. 

Angrist ‘Iron-cleaver’, the knife made by Telchar of Nogrod, taken from 
Curufin by Beren and used by him to cut the Silmaril from Morgoth’s 
crown. 

Angrod The third son of Finarfin, who with his brother Aegnor held the 
northern slopes of Dorthonion; slain in the Dagor Bragollach. 

Anguirel Eol’s sword, made of the same metal as Anglachel. 

Annael Grey-elf of Mithrim, fosterfather of Tuor. 

Annatar ‘Lord of Gifts’, name given to himself by Sauron in the Second 
Age, in that time when he appeared in a fair form among the Eldar who 
remained in Middle-earth. 

Annon-in-Gelydh ‘Gate of the Noldor’, entrance to a subterranean water¬ 
course in the western hills of Dor-lomin, leading to Cirith Ninniach. 
Annuminas ‘Tower of the West’ (i.e. of Westernesse, Numenor); city of the 
Kings of Arnor beside Lake Nenuial. 

Anor See Minas Anor. 

Apanonar ‘The Afterborn’, an Elvish name for Men. 



Aradan Sindarin name of Malach, son of Marach. 

Aragorn The thirty-ninth Heir of Isildur in the direct line; King of the 
reunited realms of Arnor and Gondor after the War of the Ring; wedded 
Arwen, daughter of Elrond. Called the Heir of Isildur. 

Araman Barren wasteland on the coast of Aman, between the Pelori and the 
Sea, extending northward to the Helcaraxe. 

Aranel Name of Dior Thingol’s Heir. 

Aranruth ‘King’s Ire’, the name of Thingol’s sword. Aranruth survived the 
ruin of Doriath and was possessed by the Kings of Numenor. 

Aranwe Elf of Gondolin, father of Voronwe. 

Aratari Second son of Isildur, slain with him at the Gladden Fields. 

Aratar ‘The Exalted’, the eight Valar of greatest power. 

Arathorn Father of Aragorn. 

Arda ‘The Realm’, name of the Earth as the Kingdom of Manwe. 

Ard-galen The great grassy plain north of Dorthonion, called after its 
desolation Anfauglith and Dor-nu-Fauglith. The name means ‘the Green 
Region’; cf. Calen-ardhon (Rohan). 

Aredhel ‘Noble Elf’, the sister of Turgon of Gondolin, who was ensnared 
by Eol in Nan Elmoth and bore to him Maeglin; called also Ar-Feiniel, the 
White Lady of the Noldor, the White Lady of Gondolin. 

Ar-Feiniel See Aredhel. 

Ar-Gimilzor Twenty-third King of Numenor, persecutor of the Elendili. 
Argonath ‘King-stones’, the Pillars of the Kings, great carvings of Isildur 
and Anarion on the Anduin at the entrance to the northern bounds of 
Gondor (see The Fellowship of the Ring II 9). 

Arien A Maia, chosen by the Valar to guide the vessel of the Sun. 

Armenelos City of the Kings in Numenor. 

Arminas See Gelmir (2). 

Arnor ‘Land of the King’, the northern realm of the Numenoreans in 
Middle-earth, established by Elendil after his escape from the Drowning of 
Numenor. 

Aros The southern river of Doriath. 

Arossiach The Fords of Aros, near the north-eastern edge of Doriath. 
Ar-Pharazon ‘The Golden’, twenty-fifth and last King of Numenor; named 
in Quenya Tar-Calion; captor of Sauron, by whom he was seduced; 
commander of the great fleet that went against Aman. 

Ar-Sakalthor Father of Ar-Gimilzor. 

Arthad One of the twelve companions of Barahir on Dorthonion. 

Arvernien The coastlands of Middle-earth west of Sirion’s mouths. Cf. 



Bilbo’s song at Rivendell: ‘Earendil was a mariner that tarried in 
Arvernien...’ ( The Fellowship of the Ring II1). 

Ar-Zimraphel See Miriel (2). 

Ascar The most northerly of the tributaries of Gelion in Ossiriand 
(afterwards called Rathloriel ). The name means hushing, impetuous’. 
Astaldo The Valiant’, name of the Vala Tulkas. 

Atalante The Downfallen’, Quenya word equivalent in meaning to 
Akallabeth. 

Atanamir See Tar-Atanamir. 

Atanatari 'Fathers of Men’; see Atani. 

Atani The Second People’, Men (singular Atan). Since in Beleriand for a 
long time the only Men known to the Noldor and Sindar were those of the 
Three Houses of the Elf-friends, this name (in the Sindarin form Adan, 
plural Edain) became specially associated with them, so that it was seldom 
applied to other Men who came later to Beleriand, or who were reported to 
be dwelling beyond the Mountains. But in the speech of Iluvatar (35) the 
meaning is ‘Men (in general)’. 

Aule A Vala, one of the Aratar, the smith and master of crafts, spouse of 
Yavanna; and for his making of the Dwarves. 

Avallone Haven and city of the Eldar on Tol Eressea, so named, according 
to the Akallabeth, ‘for it is of all cities the nearest to Valinor’. 

Avari The Unwilling, the Refusers’, the name given to all those Elves who 
refused to join the westward march from Cuivienen. See Eldar and Dark 
Elves. 

Avathar The Shadows’, the forsaken land on the coast of Aman south of 
the Bay of Eldamar, between the Pelori and the Sea, where Melkor met 
Ungoliant. 

Azaghal Lord of the Dwarves of Belegost; wounded Glaurung in the 
Nirnaeth Arnoediad, and was killed by him. 

Balanz The name of Beor the Old before he took service with Finrod. 

Balar The great bay to the south of Beleriand into which the river Sirion 
flowed. Also the isle in the bay, said to have been the eastern horn of Tol 
Eressea that broke away, where Cirdan and Gil-galad dwelt after the 
Nirnaeth Arnoediad. 

Balrog ‘Demon of Might’, Sindarin form (Quenya Valarauko ) of the name 
of the demons of fire that served Morgoth. 

Barad-dur The Dark Tower’ of Sauron in Mordor. 

Barad Eithel Tower of the Well’, the fortress of the Noldor at Eithel Sirion. 



Bar ad Nimras 'White Horn Tower’, raised by Finrod Felagund on the cape 
west of Eglarest. 

Baragund Father of Morwen the wife of Hurin; nephew of Barahir and one 
of his twelve companions on Dorthonion. 

Barahir Father of Beren; rescued Finrod Felagund in the Dagor Bragollach, 
and received from him his ring; slain on Dorthonion. For the later history of 
the ring of Barahir, which became an heirloom of the House of Isildur, see 
The Lord of the Rings Appendix A (I, iii). 

Baran Elder son of Beor the Old. 

Baranduin The Brown River’ in Eriador, flowing into the Sea south of the 
Blue Mountains; the Brandywine of the Shire in The Lord of the Rings. 
Bar-en-Danwedh ‘House of Ransom’, the name that Mim the Dwarf gave 
to his dwelling on Amon Rudh when he yielded it to Turin. 

Battles of Beleriand The first battle: The second battle (the Battle-under- 
Stars): see Dagor-nuin-Giliath. The third battle (the Glorious Battle): see 
Dagor Aglareb. The fourth battle (the Battle of Sudden Flame): see Dagor 
Bragollach. The fifth battle (Unnumbered Tears): see Nirnaeth Arnoediad. 
The Great Battle. 

Bauglir A name of Morgoth: ‘the Constrained. 

Beleg A great archer and chief of the marchwardens of Doriath; called 
Cuthalion ‘Strongbow’; friend and companion of Turin, by whom he was 
slain. 

Belegaer ‘The Great Sea’ of the West, between Middle-earth and Aman. 
Named Belegaer; but very frequently called the (Great) Sea, also the 
Western Sea and the Great Water. 

Belegost ‘Great Fortress’, one of the two cities of the Dwarves in the Blue 
Mountains; translation into Sindarin of Dwarvish Gabilgathol. See 
Mickleburg. 

Belegund Father of Rian the wife of Huor; nephew of Barahir and one of 
his twelve companions on Dorthonion. 

Beleriand The name was said to have signified ‘the country of Balar’, and 
to have been given at first to the lands about the mouths of Sirion that faced 
the Isle of Balar. Later the name spread to include all the ancient coast of 
the Northwest of Middle-earth south of the Firth of Drengist, and all the 
inner lands south of Hithlum and eastwards to the feet of the Blue 
Mountains, divided by the river Sirion into East and West Beleriand. 
Beleriand was broken in the turmoils at the end of the First Age, and 
invaded by the sea, so that only Ossiriand (Lindon) remained. 

Belfalas Region on the southern coast of Gondor looking on to the great 



bay of the same name; Bay ofBelfalas 

Belthil ‘Divine radiance’, the image of Telperion made by Turgon in 
Gondolin. 

Belthronding The bow of Beleg Cuthalion, which was buried with him. 

Beor Called the Old; leader of the first Men to enter Beleriand; vassal of 
Finrod Felagund; progenitor of the House of Beor (called also the Eldest 
House of Men and The First House of the Edain ); see Balan. House of, 
People of, Beor 

Bereg Grandson of Baran son of Beor the Old (this is not stated in the text); 
a leader of dissension among the Men of Estolad; went back over the 
mountains into Eriador. 

Beren Son of Barahir; cut a Silmaril from Morgoth’s crown to be the bride- 
price of Luthien Thingol’s daughter, and was slain by Carcharoth the wolf 
of Angband; but returning from the dead, alone of mortal Men, lived 
afterwards with Luthien on Tol Galen in Ossiriand, and fought with the 
Dwarves at Sam Athrad. Great-grandfather of Elrond and Elros and 
ancestor of the Numenorean Kings. Called also Camlost, Erchamion, and 
One-hand. 

Black Land See Mordor. 

Black Sword See Mormegil. 

Black Years 

Blessed Realm See Aman. 

Blue Mountains See Ered Luin and Ered Lindon. 

Bor A chieftain of the Easterlings, follower with his three sons of Maedhros 
and Maglor. Sons of Bor. 

Borlach One of the three sons of Bor; slain with his brothers in the Nirnaeth 
Arnoediad. 

Borlad One of the three sons of Bor; see Borlach. 

Boromir Great-grandson of Beor the Old, grandfather of Barahir father of 
Beren; first lord of Ladros. 

Boron Father of Boromir. 

Borthand One of the three sons of Bor; see Borlach. 

Bragollach See Dagor Bragollach. 

Brandir Called the Lame; ruler of the People of Haleth after the death of 
Handir his father; enamoured of Nienor; slain by Turin. 

Bregolas Father of Baragund and Belegund; slain in the Dagor Bragollach. 
Bregor Father of Barahir and Bregolas. 

Brethil The forest between the rivers Teiglin and Sirion, dwelling-place of 
the Haladin (the People of Haleth). 



Bridge of Esgalduin See Iant Iaur. 

Brilthor ‘Glittering Torrent’, the fourth of the tributaries of Gelion in 
Ossiriand. 

Brithiach The ford over Sirion north of the Forest of Brethil. 

Brithombar The northern of the Havens of the Falas on the coast of 
Beleriand. 

Brithon The river that flowed into the Great Sea at Brithombar. 

Brodda An Easterling in Hithlum after the Nirnaeth Arnoediad who took as 
wife Aerin, kinswoman of Hurin; slain by Turin. 

Cabed-en-Aras Deep gorge in the river Teiglin, where Turin slew Glaurung, 
and where Nienor leapt to her death; see Cabed Naeramarth. 

Cabed Naeramarth ‘Leap of Dreadful Doom’, name givento Cabed-en- 
Aras after Nienor leapt from its cliffs. 

Calacirya ‘Cleft of Light’, the pass made in the mountains of the Pelori, in 
which was raised the green hill of Tuna. 

Calaquendi ‘Elves of the Light’, those Elves who lived or had lived in 
Aman (the High Elves). See Moriquendi and Dark Elves. 

Calenardhon ‘The Green Province’, name of Rohan when it was the 
northern part of Gondor; cf. Ard-galen. 

Camlost ‘Empty-handed’, name taken by Beren after his return to King 
Thingol without the Silmaril. 

Caragdur The precipice on the north side of Amon Gwareth (the hill of 
Gondolin) from which Eol was cast to his death. 

Caranthir The fourth son of Feanor, called the Dark; ‘the harshest of the 
brothers and the most quick to anger’; ruled in Thargelion; slain in the 
assault on Doriath. 

Carcharoth The great wolf of Angband that bit off the hand of Beren 
bearing the Silmaril; slain by Huan in Doriath. The name is translated in the 
text as ‘the Red Maw’. Called also Anfauglir. 

Cardolan Region in the south of Eriador, a part of the Kingdom of Arnor. 
Carnil Name of a (red) star. 

Celeborn (1) ‘Tree of Silver’, name of the Tree of Tol Eressea, a scion of 
Galathilion. 

Celeborn (2) Elf of Doriath, kinsman of Thingol; wedded Galadriel and 
with her remained in Middle-earth after the end of the First Age. 

Celebrant ‘Silver Lode’, river running from Mirrormere through Lothorien 
to join the Anduin. 

Celebrimbor ‘Hand of Silver’, son of Curufin, who remained in 



Nargothrond when his father was expelled. In the Second Age greatest of 
the smiths of Eregion; maker of the Three Rings of the Elves; slain by 
Sauron. 

Celebrindal ‘Silverfoot’; see Idril. 

Celebros 'Silver Foam’ or 'Silver Rain’, a stream in Brethil falling down to 
Teiglin near the Crossings. 

Celegorm The third son of Feanor, called the Fair; until the Dagor 
Bragollach lord of the region of Himlad with Curufin his brother; dwelt in 
Nargothrond and imprisoned Futhien; master of Huan the wolfhound; slain 
by Dior in Menegroth. 

Celon River flowing southwest from the Hill of Himring, a tributary of 
Aros. The name means ‘stream flowing down from heights’. 

Children of Iluvatar Also Children of Eru: translations of Hmi Iluvataro, 
Eruhmi; the Firstborn and the Followers, Elves and Men. Also The 
Children, Children of the Earth, Children of the World. 

Cvrdan ‘The Shipwright’; Telerin Elf, lord of the Falas (coasts of West 
Beleriand); at the destruction of the Havens after the Nirnaeth Arnoediad 
escaped with Gil-galad to the Isle of Balar; during the Second and Third 
Ages keeper of the Grey Havens in the Gulf of Fhun; at the coming of 
Mithrandir entrusted to him Narya, the Ring of Fire. 

Cirith Ninniach ‘Rainbow Cleft’, by which Tuor came to the Western Sea; 
see Annon-in-Gelydh. 

Cirith Thoronath ‘Eagles’ Cleft’, a high pass in the mountains north of 
Gondolin, where Glorfindel fought with a Balrog and fell into the abyss. 
Cirth The Runes, first devised by Daeron of Doriath. 

Ciryon Third son of Isildur, slain with him at the Gladden Fields. 

Corollaire ‘The Green Mound’ of the Two Trees in Valinor; also called 
Ezellohar. 

Crissaegrim The mountain-peaks south of Gondolin, where were the eyries 
of Thorondor. 

Crossings of Teiglin In the southwest of the Forest of Brethil, where the old 
road southward from the Pass of Sirion crossed the Teiglin. 

Cuivienen ‘Water of Awakening’, the lake in Middle-earth where the first 
Elves awoke, and where they were found by Orome. 

Culurien A name of Faurelin. 

Curufin The fifth son of Feanor, called the Crafty; father of Celebrimbor. 
For the origin of his name see Feanor; and for his history see Celegorm. 
Curufinwe See Feanor. 

Curunir ‘The one of cunning devices’, Elvish name of Saruman, one of the 



Istari (Wizards). 

Cuthalion ‘Strongbow’; see Beleg. 

Daeron Minstrel and chief loremaster of King Thingol; deviser of the Cirth 
(Runes); enamoured of Luthien and twice betrayed her. 

Dagnir One of the twelve companions of Barahir on Dorthonion. 

Dagnir Glaurunga ‘Glaurung’s Bane’, Turin. 

Dagor Aglareb The Glorious Battle’, third of the great battles in the Wars 
of Beleriand. 

Dagor Bragollach The Battle of Sudden Flame’ (also simply the 
Bragollach ), fourth of the great battles in the Wars of Beleriand. 

Dagorlad 'Battle Plain’, the place of the great battle north of Mordor 
between Sauron and the Last Alliance of Elves and Men at the end of the 
Second Age. 

Dagor-nuin-Giliath The Battle-under-Stars’, the second battle in the Wars 
of Beleriand, fought in Mithrim after the coming of Feanor to Middle-earth. 
Dairuin One of the twelve companions of Barahir on Dorthonion. 

Dark Elves In the language of Aman all Elves that did not cross the Great 
Sea were Dark Elves ( Moriquendi ), and the term is sometimes used thus, 
when Caranthir called Thingol a Dark Elf it was intended opprobriously, 
and was especially so, since Thingol had been to Aman ‘and was not 
accounted among the Moriquendi’. But in the period of the Exile of the 
Noldor it was often used of the Elves of Middle-earth other than the Noldor 
and the Sindar, and is then virtually equivalent to Avari. Different again is 
the title Dark Elf of the Sindarin Elf Eol, but Turgon no doubt meant that 
E61 was of the Moriquendi. 

Dark Lord, The The term is used of Morgoth, and of Sauron. 

Days of Flight 

Deathless Lands See Undying Lands. 

Delduwath One of the later names of Dorthonion (Taur-nu-Fuin), meaning 
‘Horror of Night-shadow’. 

Denethor Son of Lenwe; leader of the Nandorin Elves that came at last over 
the Blue Mountains and dwelt in Ossiriand; slain on Amon Ereb in the First 
Battle of Beleriand. 

Dimbar The land between the rivers Sirion and Mindeb. 

Dimrost The falls of Celebros in the Forest of Brethil; translated in the text 
as ‘the Rainy Stair’. Afterwards called Nen Girith. 

Dior Called Aranel, and also Eluchil ‘Thingol’s Heir’; son of Beren and 
Luthien and father of Elwing, Elrond’s mother; came to Doriath from 



Ossiriand after the death of Thingol, and received the Silmaril after the 
death of Beren and Luthien; slain in Menegroth by the sons of Feanor. 
Dispossessed, The The House of Feanor. 

Dol Guldur ‘Hill of Sorcery’, fastness of the Necromancer (Sauron) in 
southern Mirkwood in the Third Age. 

Dolmed ‘Wet Head’, a great mountain in the Ered Luin, near the Dwarf- 
cities of Nogrod and Belegost. 

Dor Caranthir ‘Land of Caranthir’; see Thargelion. 

Dor-Cuarthol ‘Land of Bow and Helm’, name of the country defended by 
Beleg and Turin from their lair on Amon Rudh. 

Dor Daedeloth ‘Land of the Shadow of Horror’, the land of Morgoth in the 
north. 

Dor Dmen ‘The Silent Land’, where nothing dwelt, between the upper 
waters of Esgalduin and Aros. 

Dor Firn-i-Guinar ‘Land of the Dead that Live’, name of that region in 
Ossiriand where Beren and Luthien dwelt after their return. 

Doriath ‘Land of the Fence’ (Dor lath), referring to the Girdle of Melian, 
earlier called Eglador; the kingdom of Thingol and Melian in the forests of 
Neldoreth and Region, ruled from Menegroth on the river Esgalduin. Also 
called the Hidden Kingdom. 

Dorlas A Man of the Haladin in Brethil; went with Turin and Hunthor to 
the attack on Glaurung, but withdrew in fear; slain by Brandir the Lame. 
The wife of Dorlas, not named. 

Dor-lomin Region in the south of Hithlum, the territory of Fingon, given as 
a fief to the House of Hador; the home of Hurin and Morwen. The Lady of 
Dor-lomin : Morwen. 

Dor-nu-Fauglith ‘Land under Choking Ash’; see Anfauglith. 

Dorthonion ‘Land of Pines’, the great forested highlands on the northern 
borders of Beleriand, afterwards called Taur-nu-Fuin. Cf. Treebeard’s song 
in The Two Towers III 4: ‘To the pine-trees upon the highlands of 
Dorthonion I climbed in the Winter...’ 

Dragon-helm of Dor-lomin Heirloom of the House of Hador, worn by 
Turin; also called the Helm of Hador. 

Dragons 

Draugluin The great werewolf slain by Huan at Tol-in-Gaurhoth, and in 
whose form Beren entered Angband. 

Drengist The long firth that pierced Ered Lomin, the west-fence of Hithlum. 
Dry River The river that once flowed out under the Encircling Mountains 
from the primeval lake where was afterwards Tumladen, the plain of 



Gondolin. 

Duilwen The fifth of the tributaries of Gelion in Ossiriand. 

Dunedain ‘The Edain of the West’; see Numenoreans. 

Dungortheb See Nan Dungortheb. 

Durin Lord of the Dwarves of Khazad-dum (Moria). 

Dwarf-road Road leading down into Beleriand from the cities of Nogrod 
and Belegost, and crossing Gelion at the ford of Sam Athrad. 

Dwarrowdelf ‘Delving of the Dwarves’; translation of Khazaddum 
(Hadhodrond). 

Dwarves Referring to the Petty-Dwarves: Seven Fathers of the Dwarves: 
For the Necklace of the Dwarves see Nauglamir. For the Seven Rings of the 
Dwarves see Rings of Power. See also Naugrim. 

Ed The World, the material Universe; Ed, meaning in Elvish ‘It is’ or ‘Let it 
be’, was the word of Iluvatar when the World began its existence. 

Earendil Called ‘Halfelven’, ‘the Blessed’, ‘the Bright’, and ‘the Mariner’; 
son of Tuor and Idril Turgon’s daughter; escaped from the sack of Gondolin 
and wedded Elwing daughter of Dior at the Mouths of Sirion; sailed with 
her to Aman and pleaded for help against Morgoth; set to sail the skies in 
his ship Vingilot bearing the Silmaril that Beren and Luthien brought out of 
Angband. The name means ‘Lover of the Sea’. 

Earendur (1) A lord of Andunie in Numenor. 

Earendur (2) Tenth King of Arnor. 

Earnil Thirty-second King of Gondor. 

Earnur Son of Earnil; last King of Gondor, in whom the line of Anarion 
came to its end. 

Earrame ‘Sea-wing’, the name of Tuor’s ship. 

Earwen Daughter of Olwe of Alqualonde, Thingol’s brother; wedded 
Finarfin of the Noldor. From Earwen Finrod, Orodreth, Angrod, Aegnor 
and Galadriel had Telerin blood and were therefore allowed entry into 
Doriath. 

Easterlings Also called Swarthy Men; entered Beleriand from the East in 
the time after the Dagor Bragollach, and fought on both sides in the 
Nirnaeth Arnoediad; given Hithlum as a dwelling-place by Morgoth, where 
they oppressed the remnant of the People of Hador. 

Echoing Mountains See Ered Lomin. 

Echoriath ‘The Encircling Mountains’ about the plain of Gondolin. 
Ecthelion Elf-lord of Gondolin, who in the sack of the city slew and was 
slain by Gothmog Lord of Balrogs. 



Edain See Atani. 

Edrahil Chief of the Elves of Nargothrond who accompanied Finrod and 
Beren on their quest, and died in the dungeons of Tol-in-Gaurhoth. 

Eglador The former name of Doriath, before it was encompassed by the 
Girdle of Melian; probably connected with the name Eg lath. 

Eglarest The southern of the Havens of the Falas on the coast of Beleriand. 
Eglath ‘The Forsaken People’, name given to themselves by the Telerin 
Elves who remained in Beleriand seeking for Elwe (Thingol) when the 
main host of the Teleri departed to Aman. 

Eilinel The wife of Gorlim the Unhappy. 

Eithel Ivrin ‘Ivrin’s Well’, the source of the river Narog beneath Ered 
Wethrin. 

Eithel Sirion ‘Sirion’s Well’, in the eastern face of Ered Wethrin, where was 
the great fortress of Fingolfin and Fingon (see Barad Eithel ). 

Ekkaia Elvish name of the Outer Sea, encircling Arda; referred to also as 
the Outer Ocean and the Encircling Sea. 

Elbereth The usual name of Varda in Sindarin, ‘Star-Queen’; cf. Elentari. 
Eldalie ‘The Elven-folk’, used as equivalent to Eldar. 

Eldamar ‘Elvenhome’, the region of Aman in which the Elves dwelt; also 
the great Bay of the same name. 

Eldar According to Elvish legend the name Eldar ‘People of the Stars’ was 
given to all the Elves by the Vala Orome. It came however to be used to 
refer only to the Elves of the Three Kindreds (Vanyar, Noldor, and Teleri) 
who set out on the great westward march from Cuivienen (whether or not 
they remained in Middle-earth), and to exclude the Avari. The Elves of 
Aman, and all Elves who ever dwelt in Aman, were called the High Elves 
(Tareldar) and Elves of the Light ( Calaquendi ); see Dark Elves,Umanyar. 
Passim; see entry Elves. 

Eldarin Of the Eldar; used in reference to the language(s) of the Eldar. The 
occurrences of the term in fact refer to Quenya, also called High Eldarin 
and High-elven; see Quenya. 

Elder Days The First Age; also called the Eldest Days. 

Elder King Manwe. 

Eledhwen See Morwen. 

Elemmire (1) Name of a star. 

Elemmire (2) Vanyarin Elf, maker of the Aldudenie, the Lament for the Two 
Trees. 

Elende A name of Eldamar. 

Elendil Called the Tall; son of Amandil, last lord of Andunie in Numenor, 



descended from Earendil and Elwing but not of the direct line of the Kings; 
escaped with his sons Isildur and Anarion from the Drowning of Numenor 
and founded the Numenorean realms in Middle-earth; slain with Gil-galad 
in the overthrow of Sauron at the end of the Second Age. The name may be 
interpreted either as 'Elf-friend’ (cf. Elendili)or as ‘Star-lover’. Heirs of 
Elendil. 

Elendili ‘Elf-friends’, name given to those Numenoreans who were not 
estranged from the Eldar in the days of Tar-Ancalimon and later kings; also 
called the Faithful. 

Elendur Eldest son of Isildur, slain with him at the Gladden Fields. 

Elenna A (Quenya) name of Numenor, ‘Starwards’, from the guidance of 
the Edain by Earendil on their voyage to Numenor at the beginning of the 
Second Age. 

Elentari ‘Star-Queen’, a name of Varda as maker of the Stars. She is called 
thus in Galadriel’s lament in Lorien, The Fellowship of the Ring II 8. Cf. 
Elbereth, Tintalle. 

Elenwe Wife of Turgon; perished in the crossing of the Helcaraxe. 

Elerrma ‘Crowned with Stars’, a name of Taniquetil. 

Elf-friends The Men of the Three Houses of Beor, Haleth, and Hador, the 
Edain. In the Akallabeth and in Of the Rings of Power used of those 
Numenoreans who were not estranged from the Eldar; see Elendili. 
Elostirion Tallest of the towers upon Emyn Beraid, in which the palantir 
was placed. 

Elrond Son of Earendil and Elwing, who at the end of the First Age chose 
to belong to the Firstborn, and remained in Middle-earth until the end of the 
Third Age; master of Imladris (Rivendell) and keeper of Vilya, the Ring of 
Air, which he had received from Gil-galad. Called Master Elrond and 
Elrond Half-elven. The name means ‘Star-dome’. Sons of Elrond. 

Elros Son of Earendil and Elwing, who at the end of the First Age chose to 
be numbered among Men, and became the first King of Numenor (called 
Tar-Minyatur), living to a very great age. The name means ‘Star-foam’. 

Elu Sindarin form of Elwe. 

Eluchil ‘Heir of Elu (Thingol)’, name of Dior, son of Beren and Luthien. 
See Dior. 

Elured Elder son of Dior; perished in the attack on Doriath by the sons of 
Feanor. The name means the same as Eluchil. 

Elurm Younger son of Dior; perished with his brother Elured. The name 
means ‘Remembrance of Elu (Thingol)’. 

Elvenhome See Eldamar. 



Elves See Children of Iluvatar, Eldar, Dark Elves. Elves of the Light: see 
Calaquendi. 

Elwe Surnamed Singollo ‘Greymantle’; leader with his brother Olwe of the 
hosts of the Teleri on the westward journey from Cuivienen, until he was 
lost in Nan Elmoth; afterwards Lord of the Sindar, ruling in Doriath with 
Melian; received the Silmaril from Beren; slain in Menegroth by the 
Dwarves. Called (Elu) Thingol in Sindarin. See Dark Elves, Thingol. 

Elxving Daughter of Dior, who escaping from Doriath with the Silmaril 
wedded Earendil at the Mouths of Sirion and went with him to Valinor; 
mother of Elrond and Elros. The name means ‘Star-spray’; see Lanthir 
Lamath. 

Emeldir Called the Man-hearted; wife of Barahir and mother of Beren; led 
the women and children of the House of Beor from Dorthonion after the 
Dagor Bragollach. (She was herself also a descendant of Beor the Old, and 
her father’s name was Beren; this is not stated in the text.) 

Emyn Beraid ‘The Tower Hills’ in the west of Eriador; see Elostirion. 
Enchanted Isles The islands set by the Valar in the Great Sea eastwards of 
Tol Eressea at the time of the Hiding of Valinor. 

Encircling Mountains See Echoriath. 

Encircling Sea See Ekkaia. 

Endor ‘Middle Land’, Middle-earth. 

Engwar ‘The Sickly’, one of the Elvish names for Men. 

Eol Called the Dark Elf; the great smith who dwelt in Nan Elmoth, and took 
Aredhel Turgon’s sister to wife; friend of the Dwarves; maker of the sword 
Anglachel (Gurthang); father of Maeglin; put to death in Gondolin. 

Eonwe One of the mightiest of the Maiar; called the Herald of Manwe; 
leader of the host of the Valar in the attack on Morgoth at the end of the 
First Age. 

Ephel Brandir ‘The encircling fence of Brandir’, dwellings of the Men of 
Brethil upon Amon Obel; also called the Ephel. 

Ephel Duath ‘Fence of Shadow’, the mountain-range between Gondor and 
Mordor; also called the Mountains of Shadow. 

Erchamion ‘One-handed’, the name of Beren after his escape from 
Angband. 

Erech A hill in the west of Gondor, where was the Stone of Isildur (see The 
Return of the King V 2). 

Ered Engrin ‘The Iron Mountains’ in the far north. 

Ered Gorgoroth ‘The Mountains of Terror’, northward of Nan Dungortheb; 
also called the Gorgoroth. 



Ered Lindon ‘The Mountains of Lindon’, another name for Ered Luin, the 
Blue Mountains. 

Ered Lomin ‘The Echoing Mountains’, forming the west-fence of Hithlum. 
Ered Luin ‘The Blue Mountains’, also called Ered Lindon. After the 
destruction at the end of the First Age Ered Luin formed the north-western 
coastal range of Middle-earth. 

Ered Nimrais The White Mountains ( nimrais ‘white horns’), the great range 
from east to west south of the Misty Mountains. 

Ered Wethrin ‘The Mountains of Shadow’, ‘The Shadowy Mountains’, the 
great curving range bordering Dor-nu-Fauglith (Ard-galen) on the west and 
forming the barrier between Hithlum and West Beleriand. 

Eregion ‘Land of Holly’ (called by Men Hollin ); Noldorin realm in the 
Second Age at the western feet of the Misty Mountains, where the Elven 
Rings were made. 

Ereinion ‘Scion of Kings’, the son of Fingon, known always by his surname 
Gil-galad. 

Erellont One of the three mariners who accompanied Earendil on his 
voyages. 

Eressea See Tol Eressea. 

Eriador The land between the Misty Mountains and the Blue, in which lay 
the Kingdom of Arnor (and also the Shire of the Hobbits). 

Eru ‘The One’, ‘He that is Alone’: Iluvatar. Also in Children ofEru. 
Esgalduin The river of Doriath, dividing the forests of Neldoreth and 
Region, and flowing into Sirion. The name means ‘River under Veil’. 

Este One of the Valier, the spouse of Irmo (Lorien); her name means ‘Rest’. 
Estolad The land south of Nan Elmoth where the Men of the followings of 
Beor and Marach dwelt after they crossed the Blue Mountains into 
Beleriand; translated in the text as ‘the Encampment’. 

Ezellohar The Green Mound of the Two Trees of Valinor; also called 
Corollaire. 

Faelivrin Name given to Finduilas by Gwindor. 

Faithful, The See Elendili. 

Falas The western coasts of Beleriand, south of Nevrast. 

Falathar One of the three mariners who accompanied Earendil on his 
voyages. 

Falathrim The Telerin Elves of the Falas, whose lord was Cirdan. 

Falmari The Sea-elves; name of the Teleri who departed from Middle-earth 
and went into the West. 



Feanor Eldest son of Finwe (the only child of Finwe and Miriel), half- 
brother of Fingolfin and Finarfin; greatest of the Noldor, and leader in their 
rebellion; deviser of the Feanorian script; maker of the Silmarils; slain in 
Mithrim in the Dagornuin-Giliath. His name was Curufinwe (curu ‘skill’), 
and he gave this name to his fifth son, Curufin; but he was himself known 
always by his mother’s name for him, Feanaro ‘Spirit of Fire’, which was 
given the Sindarin form Feanor. Chapters 5-9 and 13 passim. Elsewhere 
his name occurs chiefly in the sons of Feanor. 

Feanturi ‘Masters of Spirits’, the Valar Namo (Mandos) and Irmo (Forien). 
Felagund The name by which King Finrod was known after the 
establishment of Nargothrond; it was Dwarvish in origin ( felak-gundu 
‘cave-hewer’, but translated in the text as ‘Ford of Caves’). For references 
see Finrod. 

Finarfin The third son of Finwe, the younger of Feanor’s half-brothers; 
remained in Aman after the Exile of the Noldor and ruled the remnant of his 
people in Tirion. Alone among the Noldorin princes he and his descendants 
had golden hair, derived from his mother Indis, who was a Vanyarin Elf 
(see Vanyar). Many other occurrences of the name of Finarfin relate to his 
sons or his people. 

Finduilas Daughter of Orodreth, loved by Gwindor; captured in the sack of 
Nargothrond, and killed by Ores at the Crossings of Teiglin. 

Fingolfin The second son of Finwe, the elder of Feanor’s half-brothers; 
High King of the Noldor in Beleriand, dwelling in Hithlum; slain by 
Morgoth in single combat. Many other occurrences of the name of 
Fingolfin relate to his sons or his people. 

Fingon The eldest son of Fingolfin, called the Valiant; rescued Maedhros 
from Thangorodrim; High King of the Noldor after the death of his father; 
slain by Gothmog in the Nirnaeth Arnoediad. 

Finrod The eldest son of Finarfin, called ‘the Faithful’ and ‘the Friend of 
Men’. Founder and King of Nargothrond, whence his name Felagund; 
encountered in Ossiriand the first Men to cross the Blue Mountains; rescued 
by Barahir in the Dagor Bragollach; redeemed his oath to Barahir by 
accompanying Beren on his quest; slain in defence of Beren in the 
dungeons of Tol-in-Gaurhoth. The following references include those to 
Felagund used alone: 

Finwe header of the Noldor on the westward journey from Cuivienen; King 
of the Noldor in Aman; father of Feanor, Fingolfin, and Finarfin; slain by 
Morgoth at Formenos. Other references are to his sons or his house. 

Firimar ‘Mortals’, one of the Elvish names for Men. 



Firstborn, The The Elder Children of Iluvatar, the Elves. 

Followers, The The Younger Children of Iluvatar, Men; translation of 
Hildor. 

Ford of Stones See Sam Athrad. 

Fords ofAros See Arossiach. 

Formenos ‘Northern Fortress’, the stronghold of Feanor and his sons in the 
north of Valinor, built after the banishment of Feanor from Tirion. 

Fornost ‘Northern Fortress’, Numenorean city on the North Downs in 
Eriador. 

Forsaken Elves See Eglath. 

Frodo The Ringbearer. 

Fuinur A renegade Numenorean who became mighty among the Haradrim 
at the end of the Second Age. 

Gabilgathol See Belegost. 

Galadriel Daughter of Finarfin and sister of Finrod Felagund; one of the 
leaders of the Noldorin rebellion against the Valar; wedded Celeborn of 
Doriath and with him remained in Middle-earth after the end of the First 
Age; keeper of Nenya, the Ring of Water, in Lothlorien. 

Galathilion The White Tree of Tirion, the image of Telperion made by 
Yavanna for the Vanyar and the Noldor. 

Galdor Called the Tall; son of Hador Lorindol and lord of Dor-lomin after 
him; father of Hurin and Huor; slain at Eithel Sirion. 
galvorn The metal devised by Eol. 

Gandalf The name among Men of Mithrandir, one of the Istari (Wizards); 
see Olorin. 

Gates of Summer A great festival of Gondolin, on the eve of which the city 
was assaulted by the forces of Morgoth. 

Gelion The great river of East Beleriand, rising in Himring and Mount Rerir 
and fed by the rivers of Ossiriand flowing down from the Blue Mountains. 
Gelmir (1) Elf of Nargothrond, brother of Gwindor, captured in the Dagor 
Bragollach and afterwards put to death in front of Eithel Sirion, as a 
provocation to its defenders, before the Nirnaeth Arnoediad. 

Gelmir (2) Elf of the people of Angrod, who with Arminas came to 
Nargothrond to warn Orodreth of its peril. 

Gildor One of the twelve companions of Barahir on Dorthonion. 

Gil-Estel ‘Star of Hope’, Sindarin name for Earendil bearing the Silmaril in 
his ship Vingilot. 

Gil-galad ‘Star of Radiance’, the name by which Ereinion son of Fingon 



was afterwards known. After the death of Turgon he became the last High 
King of the Noldor in Middle-earth, and remained in Lindon after the end 
of the First Age; leader with Elendil of the Last Alliance of Men and Elves 
and slain with him in combat with Sauron. 

Gimilkhad Younger son of Ar-Gimilzor and Inzilbeth and father of Ar- 
Pharazon, the last King of Numenor. 

Gimilzor See Ar-Gimilzor. 

Ginglith River in West Beleriand flowing into the Narog above 
Nargothrond. 

Gladden Fields Partial translation of Loeg Ningloron; the great stretches of 
reeds and iris (gladden) in and about the Anduin, where Isildur was slain 
and the One Ring lost. 

Glaurung The first of the Dragons of Morgoth, called the Father of 
Dragons; in the Dagor Bragollach, the Nirnaeth Arnoediad, and the Sack of 
Nargothrond; cast his spell upon Turin and upon Nienor; slain by Turin at 
Cabed-en-Aras. Called also the Great Worm and the Worm of Morgoth. 
Glingal ‘Hanging Flame’, the image of Laurelin made by Turgon in 
Gondolin. 

Glirhuin A minstrel of Brethil. 

Gloredhel Daughter of Hador Lorindol of Dor-lomin and sister of Galdor; 
wedded Haldir of Brethil. 

Glorfindel Elf of Gondolin, who fell to his death in Cirith Thoronath in 
combat with a Balrog after the escape from the sack of the city. The name 
means ‘Golden-haired’. 

Golodhrim The Noldor. Golodh was the Sindarin form of Quenya Noldo, 
and -rim a collective plural ending; cf. Annonin-Gelydh, the Gate of the 
Noldor. 

Gondolin ‘The Hidden Rock’ (see Ondolinde ), secret city of King Turgon 
surrounded by the Encircling Mountains (Echoriath). 

Gondolindrim The people of Gondolin. 

Gondor ‘Land of Stone’, name of the southern Numenorean kingdom in 
Middle-earth, established by Isildur and Anarion. City of Gondor: Minas 
Tirith. 

Gonnhirrim ‘Masters of Stone’, a Sindarin name for the Dwarves. 

Gorgoroth (1) See Ered Gorgoroth. 

Gorgoroth (2) A plateau in Mordor, between the converging Mountains of 
Shadow and Mountains of Ash. 

Gorlim Called the Unhappy; one of the twelve companions of Barahir on 
Dorthonion, who was ensnared by a phantom of his wife Eilinel and 



revealed to Sauron the hiding-place of Barahir. 

Gorthaur The name of Sauron in Sindarin. 

Gorthol ‘Dread Helm’, the name that Turin took as one of the Two Captains 
in the land of Dor-Cuarthol. 

Gothmog Lord of Balrogs, high-captain of Angband, slayer of Feanor, 
Fingon, and Ecthelion. (The same name was borne in the Third Age by the 
Lieutenant of Minas Morgul; The Return of the King V 6.) 

Greater Gelion One of the two tributary branches of the river Gelion in the 
north, rising in Mount Rerir. 

Great Lands Middle-earth. 

Great River See Anduin. 

Green-elves Translation of Laiquendi; the Nandorin Elves of Ossiriand. 
Greenwood the Great The great forest east of the Misty Mountains, 
afterwards named Mirkwood. 

Grey-elven tongue See Sindarin. 

Grey-elves See Sindar. 

Grey Havens See (The) Havens, Mithlond. 

Greymantle See Singollo, Thingol. 

Grinding Ice See Helcaraxe. 

Grond The great mace of Morgoth, with which he fought Fingolfin; called 
the Hammer of the Underworld. The battering-ram used against the Gate of 
Minas Tirith was named after it ( The Return of the King V 4). 

Guarded Plain See Talath Dirnen. 

Guarded Realm See Valinor. 

Guilin Father of Gelmir and Gwindor, Elves of Nargothrond. 

Gundor Younger son of Hador Lorindol, lord of Dor-lomin, slain with his 
father at Eithel Sirion in the Dagor Bragollach. 

Gurthang ‘Iron of Death’, name of Beleg’s sword Anglachel after it was 
reforged for Turin in Nargothrond, and from which he was named 
Mormegil. 

Gwaith-i-Mfrdain ‘People of the Jewel-smiths’, name of the fellowship of 
craftsmen in Eregion, greatest of whom was Celebrimbor son of Curufin. 
Gwindor Elf of Nargothrond, brother of Gelmir; enslaved in Angband, but 
escaped and aided Beleg in the rescue of Turin; brought Turin to 
Nargothrond; loved Finduilas Orodreth’s daughter; slain in the Battle of 
Tumhalad. 

Hadhodrond The Sindarin name of Khazad-dum (Moria). 

Hador Called Lorindol ‘Goldenhead’, also Hador the Golden-haired; lord 



of Dor-lomin, vassal of Fingolfin; father of Galdor father of Hurin; slain at 
Eithel Sirion in the Dagor Bragollach. The House of Hador was called the 
Third House of the Edain. House of, People of, Hador. Helm of Hador: see 
Dragon-helm of Dor-lomin. 

Haladin The second people of Men to enter Beleriand; afterwards called the 
People ofHaleth, dwelling in the Forest of Brethil, also the Men ofBrethil. 
Haldad Leader of the Haladin in their defence against the attack on them by 
Ores in Thargelion, and slain there; father of the Lady Haleth. 

Haldan Son of Haidar; leader of the Haladin after the death of the Lady 
Haleth. 

Haidar Son of Haldad of the Haladin, and brother of the Lady Haleth; slain 
with his father in the Ore-raid on Thargelion. 

Haldir Son of Halmir of Brethil; wedded Gloredhel, daughter of Hador of 
Dor-lomin; slain in the Nirnaeth Arnoediad. 

Haleth Called the Lady Haleth; leader of the Haladin (who were named 
from her the People of Haleth) from Thargelion to the lands west of Sirion. 
House of, People of, Haleth. 

Half-elven Translation of Sindarin Peredhel, plural Peredhil, applied to 
Elrond and Elros, and to Earendil. 

Half lings Translation of Periannath (Hobbits). 

Halls of Awaiting The Halls of Mandos. 

Halmir Lord of the Haladin, son of Haldan; with Beleg of Doriath defeated 
the Ores that came south from the Pass of Sirion after the Dagor 
Bragollach. 

Handir Son of Haldir and Gloredhel, father of Brandir the Lame; lord of the 
Haladin after Haldir’s death; slain in Brethil in battle with Ores. 

Haradrim The Men of Harad (‘the South’), the lands south of Mordor. 
Hareth Daughter of Halmir of Brethil; wedded Galdor of Dorlomin; mother 
of Hurin and Huor. 

Hathaldir Called the Young; one of the twelve companions of Barahir on 
Dorthonion. 

Hathol Father of Hador Lorindol. 

Haudh-en-Arwen ‘The Ladybarrow’, the burial-mound of Haleth in the 
Forest of Brethil. 

Haudh-en-Elleth The mound in which Finduilas was buried, near the 
Crossings of Teiglin. 

Haudh-en-Ndengin ‘The Mound of Slain’ in the desert of Anfauglith, where 
were piled the bodies of the Elves and Men that died in the Nirnaeth 
Arnoediad. 



Haudh-en-Nirnaeth ‘The Mound of Tears’, another name of Haudh-en- 
Ndengin. 

Havens, The Brithombar and Eglarest on the coast of Beleriand: The 
Havens of Sirion at the end of the First Age. The Grey Havens ( Mithlond ) 
in the Gulf of Lhun. Alqualonde, the Haven of the Swans or Swanhaven, is 
also called simply The Haven. 

Helcar The Inland Sea in the northeast of Middle-earth, where once stood 
the mountain of the lamp of Illuin; the mere of Cuivienen where the first 
Elves awoke is described as a bay in this sea. 

Helcaraxe The strait between Araman and Middle-earth; also referred to as 
the Grinding Ice. 

Helevorn ‘Black Glass’, a lake in the north of Thargelion, below Mount 
Rerir, where Caranthir dwelt. 

Helluin The star Sirius. 

Herumor A renegade Numenorean who became mighty among the 
Haradrim at the end of the Second Age. 

Herunumen ‘Lord of the West’, Quenya name of Ar-Adunakhor. 

Hidden Kingdom Name given both to Doriath, and to Gondolin. 

High-elven See Quenya. 

High Elves See Eldar. 

High Faroth See Taur-en-Faroth. 

Hildor ‘The Followers’, ‘The Aftercomers’, Elvish name for Men, as the 
Younger Children of Iluvatar. 

Hildorien The land in the east of Middle-earth where the first Men ( Hildor ) 
awoke. 

Himlad ‘Cool Plain’, the region where Celegorm and Curufin dwelt south 
of the Pass of Aglon. 

Himring The great hill west of Maglor’s Gap on which was the stronghold 
of Maedhros; translated in the text as ‘Ever-cold’. 

Hirilorn The great beech-tree in Doriath with three trunks, in which Luthien 
was imprisoned. The name means ‘Tree of the Lady’. 

Hisilome ‘Land of Mist’, Quenya name of Hithlum. 

Hithaeglir ‘Line of Misty Peaks’: the Misty Mountains, or Mountains of 
Mist. (The form Hithaeglin on the map to The Lord of the Rings is an error.) 
Hither Lands Middle-earth (also called the Outer Lands). 

Hithlum ‘Land of Mist’, the region bounded on the east and south by Ered 
Wethrin and on the west by Ered Lomin; see Hisilome. 

Hollin See Eregion. 

Hollowbold Translation of Nogrod: ‘hollow dwelling’ (early English bold, 



noun related to the verb build). 

Huan The great wolfhound of Valinor that Orome gave to Celegorm; friend 
and helper of Beren and Luthien; slew and slain by Carcharoth. The name 
means 'great dog, hound 5 . 

Hunthor A Man of the Haladin in Brethil who accompanied Turin in his 
attack on Glaurung at Cabed-en-Aras and was killed there by a falling 
stone. 

Huor Son of Galdor of Dor-lomin, husband of Rian and father of Tuor; 
went to Gondolin with Hurin his brother; slain in the Nirnaeth Arnoediad. 
Hurin Called Thalion The Steadfast’, The Strong’; son of Galdor of Dor- 
Domin, husband of Morwen and father of Turin and Nienor; lord of Dor- 
lomin, vassal of Fingon. Went with Huor his brother to Gondolin; captured 
by Morgoth in the Nirnaeth Arnoediad and set upon Thangorodrim for 
many years; after his release slew Mim in Nargothrond and brought the 
Nauglamir to King Thingol. 

Hyarmentir The highest mountain in the regions south of Valinor. 

Iant Iaur ‘The Old Bridge’ over the Esgalduin on the northern borders of 
Doriath; also called the Bridge of Esgalduin. 

Ibun One of the sons of Mim the Petty-dwarf. 

Idril Called Celebrindal ‘Silverfoot’; the daughter (and only child) of 
Turgon and Elenwe; wife of Tuor, mother of Earendil, with whom she 
escaped from Gondolin to the Mouths of Sirion; departed thence with Tuor 
into the West. 

Illuin One of the Lamps of the Valar made by Aule. Illuin stood in the 
northern part of Middle-earth, and after the overthrow of the mountain by 
Melkor the Inland Sea of Helcar was formed there. 

Ilmare A Maia, the handmaid of Varda. 

Ilmen The region above the air where the stars are. 

Iluvatar ‘Father of All’, Eru. 

Imlach Father of Amlach. 

Imladris ‘Rivendell’ (literally, ‘Deep Dale of the Cleft’), Elrond’s dwelling 
in a valley of the Misty Mountains. 

Indis Vanyarin Elf, close kin of Ingwe; second wife of Finwe, mother of 
Fingolfin and Finarfin. 

Ingwe Leader of the Vanyar, the first of the three hosts of the Eldar on the 
westward journey from Cuivienen. In Aman he dwelt upon Taniquetil, and 
was held High King of all the Elves. 

Inziladun Elder son of Ar-Gimilzor and Inzilbeth; afterwards named Tar- 



Palantir. 

Inzilbeth Queen of Ar-Gimilzor; of the house of the lords of Andunie. 

Irmo The Vala usually named Lorien, the place of his dwelling. 

Irmo means ‘Desirer’ or ‘Master of Desire’. 

Iron Mountains See Ered Engrin. 

Isengard Translation (to represent the language of Rohan) of the Elvish 
name Angrenost. 

Isil Quenya name of the Moon. 

Isildur Elder son of Elendil, who with his father and his brother Anarion 
escaped from the Drowning of Numenor and founded in Middle-earth the 
Numenorean realms in exile; lord of Minas Ithil; cut the Ruling Ring from 
Sauron’s hand; slain by Ores in the Anduin when the Ring slipped from his 
finger. Heirs of Isildur. Heir of Isildur = Aragorn. 

Istari The Wizards. See Curunir, Saruman; Mithrandir, Gandalf, Olorin; 
Radagast. 

Ivrin The lake and falls beneath Ered Wethrin where the river Narog rose. 
Pools of IvrinSee Eithel Ivrin. 

kelvar An Elvish word retained in the speeches of Yavanna and Manwe in 
Chapter 2: ‘animals, living things that move’. 

Kementari ‘Queen of the Earth’, a title of Yavanna. 

Khazad The name of the Dwarves in their own language (. Khuzdul ). 
Khazad-dum The great mansions of the Dwarves of Durin’s race in the 
Misty Mountains ( Hadhodrond , Moria ). See Khazad; dum is probably a 
plural or collective, meaning ‘excavations, halls, mansions’. 

Khim Son of Mim the Petty-dwarf, slain by one of Turin’s outlaw band. 
King’s Men Numenoreans hostile to the Eldar and the Elendili. 

Kinslaying, The The slaying of the Teleri by the Noldor at Alqualonde. 

Ladros The lands to the northeast of Dorthonion that were granted by the 
Noldorin Kings to the Men of the House of Beor. 

Laer Cu Beleg ‘The Song of the Great Bow’, made by Turin at Eithel Ivrin 
in memory of Beleg Cuthalion. 

Laiquendi ‘The Green-elves’ of Ossiriand. 

Lalaith ‘Laughter’, daughter of Hurin and Morwen who died in childhood. 
Lammoth ‘The Great Echo’, region north of the Firth of Drengist, named 
from the echoes of Morgoth’s cry in his struggle with Ungoliant. 

Land of Shadow See Mordor. 

Land of the Dead that Live See Dor Firn-i-Guinar. 



Land of the Star Numenor. 

Lanthir Lamath 'Waterfall of Echoing Voices’, where Dior had his house in 
Ossiriand, and after which his daughter Elwing (‘Star-spray’) was named. 
Last Alliance The league made at the end of the Second Age between 
Elendil and Gil-galad to defeat Sauron. 

Laurelin ‘Song of Gold’, the younger of the Two Trees of Valinor. 

Lay of Leithian The long poem concerning the lives of Beren and Luthien 
from which the prose account in The Silmarillion was derived. Leithian is 
translated ‘Release from Bondage’. 

Legolin The third of the tributaries of Gelion in Ossiriand. lembas Sindarin 
name of the waybread of the Eldar (from earlier lenn-mbass ‘journey- 
bread’; in Quenya coimas ‘life-bread’). 

Lenwe The leader of the Elves from the host of the Teleri who refused to 
cross the Misty Mountains on the westward journey from Cuivienen (the 
Nandor); father of Denethor. 

Lhun River in Eriador flowing into the sea in the Gulf of Lhun. 

Linaexven ‘Lake of birds’, the great mere in Nevrast. 

Lindon A name of Ossiriand in the First Age. After the tumults at the end of 
the First Age the name Lindon was retained for the lands west of the Blue 
Mountains that still remained above the Sea. 

Lindorie Mother of Inzilbeth. 

Little Gelion One of the two tributary branches of the river Gelion in the 
north, rising in the Hill of Himring. 

Loeg Ningloron ‘Pools of the golden water-flowers’; see Gladden Fields, 
lomelindi Quenya word meaning ‘dusk-singers’, nightingales. 

Lomion ‘Son of Twilight’, the Quenya name that Aredhel gave to Maeglin. 
Lonely Isle See Tol Eressea. 

Lord of Waters See Ulmo. 

Lords of the West See Valar. 

Lorellin The lake in Lorien in Valinor where the Vala Este sleeps by day. 
Lorgan Chief of the Easterling Men in Hithlum after the Nirnaeth 
Arnoediad, by whom Tuor was enslaved. 

Lorien (1) The name of the gardens and dwelling-place of the Vala Irmo, 
who was himself usually called Lorien. 

Lorien (2) The land ruled by Celeborn and Galadriel between the rivers 
Celebrant and Anduin. Probably the original name of this land was altered 
to the form of the Quenya name Lorien of the gardens of the Vala Irmo in 
Valinor. In Lothlorien the Sindarin word loth ‘flower’ is prefixed. 

Lorindol ‘Goldenhead’; s eeHador. 



Losgar The place of the burning of the ships of the Teleri by Feanor, at the 
mouth of the Firth of Drengist. 

Lothlann ‘The wide and empty’, the great plain north of the March of 
Maedhros. 

Lothlorien ‘Lorien of the Blossom’; see Lorien (2). 

Luinil Name of a star (one shining with a blue light). 

Lumbar Name of a star. 

Luthien The daughter of King Thingol and Melian the Maia, who after the 
fulfilment of the Quest of the Silmaril and the death of Beren chose to 
become mortal and to share his fate. See Tinuviel. 

Mablung Elf of Doriath, chief captain of Thingol, friend of Turin; called ‘of 
the Heavy Hand’ (which is the meaning of the name Mablung ); slain in 
Menegroth by the Dwarves. 

Maedhros The eldest son of Feanor, called the Tall; rescued by Fingon from 
Thangorodrim; held the Hill of Himring and the lands about; formed the 
Union of Maedhros that ended in the Nirnaeth Arnoediad; bore one of the 
Silmarils with him to his death at the end of the First Age. 

Maeglin ‘Sharp Glance’, son of Eol and Aredhel Turgon’s sister, born in 
Nan Elmoth; became mighty in Gondolin, and betrayed it to Morgoth; slain 
in the sack of the city by Tuor. See Lomion. 

Maglor The second son of Feanor, a great singer and minstrel; held the 
lands called Maglor’s Gap; at the end of the First Age seized with 
Maedhros the two Silmarils that remained in Middle-earth, and cast the one 
that he took into the Sea. 

Maglor ’s Gap The region between the northern arms of Gelion where there 
were no hills of defence against the North. 

Magor Son of Malach Aradan; leader of the Men of the following of 
Marach who entered West Beleriand. 

Mahal The name given to Aule by the Dwarves. 

Mahanaxar The Ring of Doom outside the gates of Valmar, in which were 
set the thrones of the Valar where they sat in council. 

Mahtan A great smith of the Noldor, father of Nerdanel the wife of Feanor. 
Malar Ainur of lesser degree than the Valar (singular Maia). 

Malach Son of Marach; given the Elvish name Aradan. 

Malduin A tributary of the Teiglin; the name probably means ‘Yellow 
River’. 

Malinalda ‘Tree of Gold’, a name of Laurelin. 

Mandos The place of the dwelling in Aman of the Vala properly called 



Namo, the Judge, though this name was seldom used, and he himself was 
usually referred to as Mandos. Named as Vala. Named as the place of his 
dwelling (including Halls of Mandos; also Halls of Awaiting, Houses of the 
Dead). With reference to the Doom of the Noldor and the Curse of Mandos. 
Manwe The chief of the Valar, called also Sulimo, the Elder King, the Ruler 
ofArda. 

Marach Leader of the third host of Men to enter Beleriand, ancestor of 
Hador Lorindol. 

March of Maedhros The open lands to the north of the head-waters of the 
river Gelion, held by Maedhros and his brothers against attack on East 
Beleriand; also called the eastern March. 

Mardil Called the Faithful; the first Ruling Steward of Gondor. 
Mar-nu-Falmar The Land under the Waves’, name of Numenor after the 
Downfall. 

Melian A Maia, who left Valinor and came to Middle-earth; afterwards the 
Queen of King Thingol in Doriath, about which she set a girdle of 
enchantment, the Girdle of Melian; mother of Luthien, and foremother of 
Elrond and Elros. 

Melkor The Quenya name for the great rebellious Vala, the beginning of 
evil, in his origin the mightiest of the Ainur; afterwards named Morgoth, 
Bauglir, the Dark Lord, the Enemy, etc. The meaning of Melkor was 'He 
who arises in Might’; the Sindarin form was Belegur, but it was never used, 
save in a deliberately altered form Belegurth 'Great Death’. Passim (after 
the rape of the Silmarils usually called Morgoth). 

MenAtani, Children oflluvatar, Easterlings. 

Menegroth ‘The Thousand Caves’, the hidden halls of Thingol and Melian 
on the river Esgalduin in Doriath. 

Meneldil Son of Anarion, King of Gondor. 

Menelmacar ‘Swordsman of the Sky’, the constellation Orion. 

Meneltarma 'Pillar of Heaven’, the mountain in the midst of Numenor, 
upon whose summit was the Hallow of Eru Iluvatar. 

Meres of Twilight See Aelin-uial. 

Mereth Aderthad The 'Feast of Reuniting’ held by Fingolfin near the Pools 
of Ivrin. 

Mickleburg Translation of Belegost: ‘great fortress’. 

Middle-earth The lands to the east of the Great Sea; also called the Hither 
Lands, the Outer Lands, the Great Lands, and Endor. Passim. 

Mim The Petty-dwarf, in whose house ( Bar-en-Danwedh ) on Amon Rudh 
Turin dwelt with the outlaw band, and by whom their lair was betrayed to 



the Ores; slain by Hurin in Nargothrond. 

Minas Anor ‘Tower of the Sun’ (also simply Anor), afterwards called Minas 
Tirith; the city of Anarion, at the feet of Mount Mindolluin. 

Minas Ithil ‘Tower of the Moon’, afterwards called Minas Morgul; the city 
of Isildur, built on a shoulder of the Ephel Duath. 

Minas Morgul ‘Tower of Sorcery’ (also simply Morgul), name of Minas 
Ithil after its capture by the Ringwraiths. 

Minastir See Tar-Minastir. 

Minas Tirith (1) ‘Tower of Watch’, built by Finrod Felagund on Tol Sirion; 
see Tol-in-Gaurhoth. 

Minas Tirith (2) Fater name of Minas Anor. Called the City ofGondor. 
Mindeb A tributary of Sirion, between Dimbar and the Forest of Neldoreth. 
Mindolluin ‘Towering Blue-head’, the great mountain behind Minas Anor. 
Mindon Eldalieva ‘Fofty Tower of the Eldalie’, the tower of Ingwe in the 
city of Tirion; also simply the Mindon. 

Muriel (1) The first wife of Finwe, mother of Feanor; died after Feanor’s 
birth. Called Serinde ‘the Broideress’. 

Muriel (2) Daughter of Tar-Palantir, forced into marriage by Ar-Pharazon, 
and as his queen named Ar-Zimraphel; also called Tar-Miriel. 

Mirkwood See Greenwood the Great. 

Misty Mountains See Hithaeglir. 

Mithlond ‘The Grey Havens’, harbours of the Elves on the Gulf of Fhun; 
also referred to as the Havens. 

Mithrandir ‘The Grey Pilgrim’, Elvish name of Gandalf (Olorin), one of the 
Istari (Wizards). 

Mithrim The name of the great lake in the east of Hithlum, and also of the 
region about it and of the mountains to the west, separating Mithrim from 
Dor-lomin. The name was originally that of the Sindarin Elves who dwelt 
there. 

Mordor ‘The Black Fand’, also called the Land of Shadow; Sauron’s realm 
east of the mountains of the Ephel Duath. 

Morgoth ‘The Black Enemy’, name of Melkor, first given to him by Feanor 
after the rape of the Silmarils and thereafter passim. See Melkor. 

Morgul See Minas Morgul. 

Moria ‘The Black Chasm’, later name for Khazad-dum (Hadhodrond). 
Moriquendi ‘Elves of the Darkness’; see Dark Elves. 

Mormegil ‘The Black Sword’, name given to Turin as captain of the host of 
Nargothrond; see Gurthang. 

Morwen Daughter of Baragund (nephew of Barahir, the father of Beren); 



wife of Hurin and mother of Turin and Nienor; called Eledhwen (translated 
in the text as ‘Elfsheen’) and the Lady of Dor-lomin. 

Mountain of Fire See Orodruin. 

Mountains : of Aman, of Defence, see Pelori; of the East, see Orocarni; of 
Iron, see Ered Engrin; of Mist, see Hithaeglir; of Mithrim, see Mithrim; of 
Shadow, see Ered Wethrin and Ephel Duath; of Terror, see Ered Gorgoroth. 
Mount Doom See Amon Amarth. 

Music of the Amur See Ainulindale. 

Nahar The horse of the Vala Orome, said by the Eldar to be so named on 
account of his voice. 

Namo A Vala, one of the Aratar; usually named Mandos, the place of his 
dwelling. Namo means ‘Ordainer, Judge 5 . 

Nandor Said to mean ‘Those who turn back’: the Nandor were those Elves 
from the host of the Teleri who refused to cross the Misty Mountains on the 
westward journey from Cuivienen, but of whom a part, led by Denethor, 
came long afterwards over the Blue Mountains and dwelt in Ossiriand (the 
Green-elves). 

Nan Dungortheb Also Dungortheb; translated in the text as ‘Valley of 
Dreadful Death’. The valley between the precipices of Ered Gorgoroth and 
the Girdle of Melian. 

Nan Elmoth The forest east of the river Celon where Elwe (Thingol) was 
enchanted by Melian and lost; afterwards the dwelling-place of Eol. 
Nan-tathren ‘Willow-vale’, translated as ‘the Land of Willows’, where the 
river Narog flowed into Sirion. In Treebeard’s song in The Two Towers III 4 
Quenya forms of the name are used: in the willow-meads of Tasarinan; 
Nan-tasarion. 

Nargothrond ‘The great underground fortress on the river Narog’, founded 
by Finrod Felagund and destroyed by Glaurung; also the realm of 
Nargothrond extending east and west of the Narog. 

Nam i Hin Hurin ‘The Tale of the Children of Hurin’, the long lay from 
which Chapter 21 was derived; ascribed to the poet Dirhaval, a Man who 
lived at the Havens of Sirion in the days of Earendil and perished in the 
attack of the sons of Feanor. 

Nam signifies a tale made in verse, but to be spoken and not sung. 

Narog The chief river of West Beleriand, rising at Ivrin under Ered Wethrin 
and flowing into Sirion in Nan-tathren. 

Narsil The sword of Elendil, made by Telchar of Nogrod, that was broken 
when Elendil died in combat with Sauron; from the shards it was reforged 



for Aragorn and named Anduril. 

Narsilion The Song of the Sun and Moon. 

Narya One of the Three Rings of the Elves, the Ring of Fire or the Red 
Ring; borne by Cirdan and afterwards by Mithrandir. 

Nauglamir ‘The Necklace of the Dwarves’, made for Finrod Felagund by 
the Dwarves, brought by Hurin out of Nargothrond to Thingol, and the 
cause of his death. 

Naugrim ‘The Stunted People’, Sindarin name for the Dwarves. 

Nazgul See Ring-wraiths. 

Necklace of the Dwarves See Nauglamir. 

Neithan Name given to himself by Turin among the outlaws, translated as 
‘The Wronged’ (literally ‘one who is deprived’). 

Neldoreth The great beech-forest forming the northern part of Doriath; 
called Taur-na-Neldor in Treebeard’s song in The Two Towers III 4. 

Nenar Name of a star. 

Nen Girith ‘Shuddering Water’, name given to Dimrost, the falls of 
Celebros in the Forest of Brethil. 

Nenning River in West Beleriand, reaching the sea at the Haven of Eglarest. 
Nenuial ‘Fake of Twilight’, in Eriador, where the river Baranduin rose, and 
beside which the city of Annuminas was built. 

Nenya One of the Three Rings of the Elves, the Ring of Water, borne by 
Galadriel; also called the Ring of Adamant. 

Nerdanel Called the Wise; daughter of Mahtan the smith, wife of Feanor. 
Nessa One of the Valier, the sister of Orome and spouse of Tulkas. 

Nevrast The region west of Dor-lomin, beyond Ered Fomin, where Turgon 
dwelt before his departure to Gondolin. The name, meaning ‘Hither Shore’, 
was originally that of all the northwestern coast of Middle-earth (the 
opposite being Haerast ‘the Far Shore’, the coast of Aman). 

Nienna One of the Valier, numbered among the Aratar; Fady of pity and 
mourning, the sister of Mandos and Forien. 

Nienor ‘Mourning’, the daughter of Hurin and Morwen and sister of Turin; 
spell-bound by Glaurung at Nargothrond and in ignorance of her past 
wedded Turin in Brethil in her name Niniel; cast herself into the Teiglin. 
Nimbrethil Birch-woods in Arvernien in the south of Beleriand. Cf. Bilbo’s 
song at Rivendell: ‘He built a boat of timber felled in Nimbrethil to journey 
in ...’(The Fellowship of the Ring II 1). 

Nimloth (1) The White Tree of Numenor, of which a fruit taken by Isildur 
before it was felled grew into the White Tree of Minas Ithil. Nimloth ‘White 
Blossom’ is the Sindarin form of Quenya Ninquelote, one of the names of 



Telperion. 

Nimloth (2) Elf of Doriath who wedded Dior Thingol’s Heir; mother of 
Elwing; slain in Menegroth in the attack by the sons of Feanor. 

Nimphelos The great pearl given by Thingol to the lord of the Dwarves of 
Belegost. 

Niniel ‘Tear-maiden’, the name that Turin, ignorant of their relationship, 
gave to his sister; see Nienor. 

Ninquelote ‘White Blossom’, a name of Telperion; see Nimloth (1). 
niphredil A white flower that bloomed in Doriath in starlight when Futhien 
was born. It grew also on Cerin Amroth in Lothlorien ( The Fellowship of 
the Ring II 6). 

Nirnaeth Arnoediad ‘Tears Unnumbered’ (also simply the Nirnaeth), the 
name given to the ruinous fifth battle in the Wars of Beleriad. 

Nivrim That part of Doriath that lay on the west bank of Sirion. 

Noegyth Nibin ‘Petty-dwarves (see also under Dwarves). 

Nogrod One of the two cities of the Dwarves in the Blue Mountains; 
translation into Sindarin of Dwarvish Tumunzahar. See Hollowbold. 
Noldolante ‘The Fall of the Noldor’, a lament made by Maglor son of 
Feanor. 

Noldor The Deep Elves, the second host of the Eldar on the westward 
journey from Cuivienen, led by Finwe. The name (Quenya Noldo, Sindarin 
Golodh ) meant ‘the Wise’ (but wise in the sense of possessing knowledge, 
not in the sense of possessing sagacity, sound judgement). For the language 
of the Noldor see Quenya. 

Nom, Nomin ‘Wisdom’ and ‘the Wise’, the names that the Men of Beor’s 
following gave to Finrod and his people in their own tongue. 

North Downs In Eriador, where was built the Numenorean city of Fornost. 
Nulukkizdm Dwarvish name of Nargothrond. 

Numenor (In full Quenya form Numenor e.) ‘Westernesse’, ‘Westland’, the 
great island prepared by the Valar as a dwelling-place for the Edain after the 
ending of the First Age. Called also Anadune, Andor, Elenna, the Land of 
the Star, and after its downfall Akallabeth, Atalante, and Mar-nu-Falmar. 
Numenoreans The Men of Numenor, called also Dunedain. 

Nurtale Valinoreva ‘The Hiding of Valinor’. 

Ohtar ‘Warrior’, esquire of Isildur, who brought the shards of Elendil’s 
sword to Imladris. 

Oiolosse ‘Ever-snow-white’, the most common name among the Eldar for 
Taniquetil, rendered into Sindarin as Amon Uilos; but according to the 



Valaquenta it was ‘the uttermost tower of Taniquetil 5 . 

Oiomure A region of mists near to the Helcaraxe. 

Olorin A Maia, one of the Istari (Wizards); Mithrandir, Gandalf, and cf. The 
Two Tower IV 5: ‘Olorin I was in my youth in the West that is forgotten 5 . 
olvar An Elvish word retained in the speeches of Yavanna and Manwe in 
Chapter 2, meaning ‘growing things with roots in the earth 5 . 

Olwe Leader together with his brother Elwe (Thingol) of the hosts of the 
Teleri on the westward journey from Cuivienen; lord of the Teleri of 
Alqualonde in Aman. 

Ondolinde ‘Stone Song 5 , the original Quenya name of Gondolin. 

Ores Creatures of Morgoth. 

Orfalch Echor The great ravine through the Encircling Mountains by which 
Gondolin was approached. 

Ormal One of the Lamps of the Valar made by Aule. Ormal stood in the 
south of Middle-earth. 

Orocarni The Mountains of the East of Middle-earth (the name means ‘the 
Red Mountains 5 ). 

Orodreth The second son of Finarfin; warden of the tower of Minas Tirith 
on Tol Sirion; King of Nargothrond after the death of Finrod his brother; 
father of Finduilas; slain in the Battle of Tumhalad. 

Orodruin ‘Mountain of Blazing Fire 5 in Mordor, in which Sauron forged the 
Ruling Ring; called also Amon Amarth ‘Mount Doom 5 . 

Orome A Vala, one of the Aratar; the great hunter, leader of the Elves from 
Cuivienen, spouse of Vana. The name means ‘Horn-blowing 5 or ‘Sound of 
Horns 5 , cf. Valaroma; in The Lord of the Rings it appears in the Sindarin 
form Araw. 

Oromet A hill near the haven of Andunie in the west of Numenor, on which 
was built the tower of Tar-Minastir. 

Orthanc ‘Forked Height 5 , the Numenorean tower in the Circle of Isengard. 
Osgiliath ‘Fortress of the Stars 5 , the chief city of ancient Gondor, on either 
side of the river Anduin. 

Osse A Maia, vassal of Ulmo, with whom he entered the waters of Arda; 
lover and instructor of the Teleri. 

Ossiriand ‘Land of Seven Rivers 5 (these being Gelion and its tributaries 
flowing down from the Blue Mountains), the land of the Green-elves. Cf. 
Treebeard’s song in The Two Towers III 4: ‘I wandered in Summer in the 
elm-woods of Ossiriand. Ah! the light and the music in the Summer by the 
Seven Rivers of Ossir! 5 See Lindon. 

Ost-in-Edhil ‘Fortress of the Eldar 5 , the city of the Elves in Eregion. 



Outer Lands Middle-earth (also called the Hither Lands). 

Outer Sea See Ekkaia. 

Palantiri Those that watch from afar’, the seven Seeing Stones brought by 
Elendil and his sons from Numenor; made by Feanor in Aman (see The Two 
Towers III 11). 

Pelargir ‘Garth of Royal Ships’, the Numenorean haven above the delta of 
Anduin. 

Pelori ‘The fencing or defensive heights’, called also the Mountains of 
Aman and the Mountains of Defence, raised by the Valar after the 
destruction of their dwelling on Almaren; ranging in a crescent from north 
to south, close to the eastern shores of Aman. 

People ofHaleth See Haladin and Haleth. 

Periannath The Halflings (Hobbits). 

Petty-dwarves Translation of Noegyth Nibin. See also under Dwarves. 
Pharazon See Ar-Pharazdn. 

Prophecy of the North The Doom of the Noldor, uttered by Mandos on the 
coast of Araman. 

Quendi Original Elvish name for Elves (of every kind, including the Avari), 
meaning ‘Those that speak with voices’. 

Quenta Silmarillion ‘The History of the Silmarils.’ 

Quenya The ancient tongue, common to all Elves, in the form that it took in 
Valinor; brought to Middle-earth by the Noldorin exiles, but abandoned by 
them as a daily speech, especially after the edict of King Thingol against its 
use; see especially 128-9, 149-50. Not named as such in this book, but 
referred to as Eldarin; High Eldarin; High-elven; the tongue of Valinor; the 
speech of the Elves of Valinor; the tongue of the Noldor; the High Speech of 
the West. 

Radagast One of the Istari (Wizards). 

Radhruin One of the twelve companions of Barahir on Dorthonion. 

Ragnor One of the twelve companions of Barahir on Dorthonion. 

Ramdal ‘Wall’s End’ (see Andram), where the dividing fall across Beleriand 
ceased. 

Rana ‘The Wanderer’, a name of the Moon among the Noldor. 

Rathloriel ‘Golden-bed’, later name for the river Ascar, after the treasure of 
Doriath was sunk in it. 

Rauros ‘Roaring Spray’, the great falls in the river Anduin. 



Red Ring, The See Narya. 

Region The dense forest forming the southern part of Doriath. 

Rerir Mountain to the north of Lake Helevorn, where rose the greater of the 
two tributary branches of Gelion. 

Rhovanion ‘Wilderland’, the wide region east of the Misty Mountains. 
Rhudaur Region in the north-east of Eriador. 

Rian Daughter of Belegund (nephew of Barahir, the father of Beren); wife 
of Huor and mother of Tuor; after Huor’s death died of grief on the Haudh- 
en-Ndengin. 

Ringil The sword of Fingolfin. 

Ring of Doom See Mahanaxar. 

Rings of Power The One Ring, Great Ring, or Ruling Ring: Three Rings of 
the Elves : (see also Narya, the Ring of Fire, Nenya, the Ring of Adamant, 
and Vdya, the Ring of Sapphire). Seven Rings of the Dwarves. Nine Rings of 
Men. 

Ringwil The stream that flowed into the river Narog at Nargothrond. 
Ring-wraiths The slaves of the Nine Rings of Men and chief servants of 
Sauron; also called Nazgul and Ulairi. 

Rivendell Translation of Imladris. 

Rivil Stream falling northwards from Dorthonion and flowing into Sirion in 
the Fen of Serech. Rivil’s Well. 

Rochallor The horse of Fingolfin. 

Rohan The Horse-country’, later name in Gondor for the great grassy plain 
formerly called Calenardhon. 

Rohirrim The Horse-lords’ of Rohan. 

Romenna Haven on the east coast of Numenor. 

Rothinzil Adunaic (Numenorean) name of Earendil’s ship Vingilot, with the 
same meaning, 'Foam-flower’. 

Rumil A Noldorin sage of Tirion, the first deviser of written characters (cf. 
The Lord of the Rings Appendix E II); to him is attributed the Ainulindale. 

Saeros Nandorin Elf, one of the chief counsellors of Thingol in Doriath; 
insulted Turin in Menegroth, and by him pursued to his death. 

Salmar A Maia who entered Arda with Ulmo; maker of Ulmo’s great horns, 
the Ulumuri. 

Sam Athrad 'Ford of Stones’, where the Dwarf-road from Nogrod and 
Belegost crossed the river Gelion. 

Saruman ‘Man of Skill’, the name among Men of Curunir (which it 
translates), one of the Istari (Wizards). 



Sauron The Abhorred’ (in Sindarin called Gorthaur ); greatest of the 
servants of Melkor, in his origin a Maia of Aule. 

Secondborn, The The Younger Children of Iluvatar, Men. 

Seeing Stones See Palantiri. 

Serech The great fen north of the Pass of Sirion, where the river Rivil 
flowed in from Dorthonion. 

seregon 'Blood of Stone’, a plant with deep red flowers that grew on Amon 
Rudh. 

Serinde The Broideress’; see Miriel (1). 

Seven Fathers of the Dwarves See Dwarves. 

Seven Stones See Palantiri. 

Shadowy Mountains See Ered Wethrin. 

Shepherds of the Trees Ents. 

Sickle of the Valar See Valacirca. 

Silmarien Daughter of Tar-Elendil, the fourth King of Numenor; mother of 
the first lord of Andunie and ancestress of Elendil and his sons Isildur and 
Anarion. 

Silmarils The three jewels made by Feanor before the destruction of the 
Two Trees of Valinor, and filled with their light. 

Silpion A name of Telperion. 

Silvan Elves Also called Woodland Elves. They appear to have been in 
origin those Nandorin Elves who never passed west of the Misty 
Mountains, but remained in the Vale of Anduin and in Greenwood the 
Great; see Nandor. 

Sindar The Grey-elves. The name was applied to all the Elves of Telerin 
origin whom the returning Noldor found in Beleriand, save for the Green- 
elves of Ossiriand. The Noldor may have devised this name because the 
first Elves of this origin whom they met with were in the north, under the 
grey skies and mists about Lake Mithrim (see Mithrim ); or perhaps because 
the Grey-elves were not of the Light (of Valinor) nor yet of the Dark 
(Avari), but were Elves of the Twilight. But it was held to refer to Elwe’s 
name Thingol (Quenya Sindacollo, Singollo 'Grey-cloak’), since he was 
acknowledged high king of all the land and its peoples. The Sindar called 
themselves Edhil, plural Edhel. 

Sindarin The Elvish tongue of Beleriand, derived from the common Elvish 
speech but greatly changed through long ages from Quenya of Valinor; 
acquired by the Noldorin exiles in Beleriand. Called also the Grey-elven 
tongue, the tongue of the Elves of Beleriand, etc. 

Singollo ‘Grey-cloak’, 'Grey-mantle’; see Sindar, Thingol. 



Sirion The Great River’ flowing from north to south and dividing West 
from East Beleriand. Falls of Sirion. Fens of Siron. Gates of Sirion. Havens 
of Sirion. Mouths of Sirion. Vale of Sirion. 

Sons of Feanor See Maedhros, Maglor, Celegorm, Caranthir, Curufin, 
Amrod, Amras. Often referred to as a group, especially after the death of 
their father. 

Soronume Name of a constellation. 

Stone of the Hapless Memorial stone of Turin and Nienor by Cabed 
Naeramarth in the river Teiglin. 

Straight Road, Straight Way The path over the Sea into the Ancient or True 
West, on which the ships of the Elves might still sail after the Downfall of 
Numenor and the Changing of the World. 

Strongbow Translation of Cuthalion, name of Beleg. 

Sulimo Name of Manwe, rendered in the Valaquenta as 'Lord of the Breath 
of Arda’ (literally ‘the Breather’). 

Swanhaven See Alqualonde. 

Swarthy Men See Easterlings. 

Talath Dirnen The Guarded Plain, north of Nargothrond. 

Talath Rhunen ‘The East Vale’, earlier name of Thargelion. 

Taniquetil ‘High White Peak’, highest of the mountains of the Pelori and 
the highest mountain of Arda, upon whose summit are Ilmarin, the 
mansions of Manwe and Varda; also called the White Mountain, the Holy 
Mountain, and the Mountain of Manwe. See Oiolosse. 

Tar-Ancalimon Fourteenth King of Numenor, in whose time the 
Numenoreans became divided into opposed parties. 

Taras Mountain on a promontory of Nevrast; beneath it was Vinyamar, the 
dwelling of Turgon before he went to Gondolin. 

Tar-Atanamir Thirteenth King of Numenor, to whom the Messengers of the 
Valar came. 

Tar-Calion Quenya name of Ar-Pharazon. 

Tar-Ciryatan Twelfth King of Numenor, ‘the Shipbuilder’. 

Tar-Elendil Fourth King of Numenor, father of Silmarien, from whom 
Elendil was descended. 

Tar-Minastir Eleventh King of Numenor, who aided Gil-galad against 
Sauron. 

Tar-Minyatur Name of Elros Half-elven as first King of Numenor. 

Tar-Miriel See Miriel (2). 

Tarn Aeluin The lake on Dorthonion where Barahir and his companions 



made their lair, and where they were slain. 

Tar-Palantir Twenty-fourth King of Numenor, who repented of the ways of 
the Kings, and took his name in Quenya: ‘He who looks afar’. See 
Inziladun. 

Taur-en-Faroth The wooded highlands to the west of the river Narog above 
Nargothrond; also called the High Faroth. 

Taur-im-Duinath ‘The Forest between Rivers’, name of the wild country 
south of the Andram between Sirion and Gelion. 

Taur-nu-Fuin Later name of Dorthonion: ‘the Forest under Night’. Cf. 
Delduwath. 

Tauron ‘The Forester’ (translated in the Valaquenta ‘Lord of Forests’), a 
name of Orome among the Sindar. Cf. Aldaron. 

Teiglin A tributary of Sirion, rising in Ered Wethrin and bounding the Forest 
of Brethil on the south; see also Crossings of Teiglin. 

Telchar The most renowned of the smiths of Nogrod, the maker of Angrist 
and (according to Aragorn in The Two Towers III 6) of Narsil. 

Telemnar Twenty-sixth King of Gondor. 

Teleri The third and greatest of the three hosts of the Eldar on the westward 
journey from Cuivienen, led by Elwe (Thingol) and Olwe. Their own name 
for themselves was Lindar, the Singers; the name Teleri, the Last-comers, 
the Hindmost, was given to them by those before them on the march. Many 
of the Teleri did not leave Middle-earth; the Sindar and the Nandor were 
Telerin Elves in origin. 

Telperion The elder of the Two Trees of Valinor. Called the White Tree. 
Telumendil Name of a constellation. 

Thalion ‘Steadfast, Strong’; see Hurin. 

Thalos The second of the tributaries of Gelion in Ossiriand. 

Thangorodrim ‘Mountains of Tyranny’, reared by Morgoth above Angband; 
broken down in the Great Battle at the end of the First Age. 

Thargelion ‘The Land beyond Gelion’, between Mount Rerir and the river 
Ascar, where Caranthir dwelt; called also Dor Caranthir and Talath 
Rhunen. 

Thingol ‘Grey-cloak’, ‘Grey-mantle’ (in Quenya Sindacollo, Singollo), the 
name by which Elwe, leader with his brother Olwe of the host of the Teleri 
from Cuivienen and afterwards King of Doriath, was known in Beleriand; 
also called the Hidden King. See Elwe. 

Thorondor ‘King of Eagles.’ Cf. The Return of the King VI 4: ‘Old 
Thorondor, who built his eyries in the inaccessible peaks of the Encircling 
Mountains when Middle-earth was young’. See Crissaegrim. 



Thousand Caves See Menegroth. 

Thranduil Sindarin Elf, King of the Silvan Elves in the north of Greenwood 
the Great (Mirkwood); father of Legolas, who was of the Fellowship of the 
Ring. 

Thuringwethil 'Woman of Secret Shadow’, the messenger of Sauron from 
Tol-in-Gaurhoth who took the form of a great bat, and in whose shape 
Luthien entered Angband. 

Tilion A Maia, steersman of the Moon. 

Tintalle 'The Kindler’, a name of Varda as maker of the Stars. She is called 
thus in Galadriel’s lament in Lorien, The Fellowship of the Ring II 8. Cf. 
Elbereth, Elentari. 

Tinuviel The name that Beren gave to Luthien: a poetic word for the 
nightingale, 'Daughter of Twilight’. See Luthien. 

Tirion ‘Great Watch-tower’, the city of the Elves on the hill of Tuna in 
Aman. 

Tol Eressea ‘The Lonely Isle’ (also simply Eressea ), on which the Vanyar 
and the Noldor and afterwards the Teleri were drawn across the ocean by 
Ulmo, and which was at last rooted in the Bay of Eldamar near to the coasts 
of Aman. On Eressea the Teleri long remained before they went to 
Alqualonde; and there dwelt many of the Noldor and the Sindar after the 
ending of the First Age. 

Tol Galen ‘The Green Isle’ in the river Adurant in Ossiriand, where Beren 
and Luthien dwelt after their return. 

Tol-in-Gaurhoth ‘Isle of Werewolves’, name of Tol Sirion after its capture 
by Sauron. 

Tol Morwen Island in the sea after the drowning of Beleriand on which 
stood the memorial stone of Turin, Nienor, and Morwen. 

Tol Sirion Island in the river in the Pass of Sirion on which Finrod built the 
tower of Minas Tirith; after its capture by Sauron named Tol-in-Gaurhoth. 
Tulkas A Vala, the ‘greatest in strength and deeds of prowess’, who came 
last to Arda; also called Astaldo. 

Tumhalad Valley in the land between the rivers Ginglith and Narog, where 
the host of Nargothrond was defeated. 

Tumladen ‘The Wide Valley’, the hidden vale in the Encircling Mountains 
in the midst of which stood the city of Gondolin. ( Tumladen was afterwards 
the name of a valley in Gondor: The Return of the King V 1.) 

Tumunzahar See Nogrod. 

Tuna The green hill in the Calacirya on which Tirion, the city of the Elves, 
was built. 



Tuor Son of Huor and Rian, fostered by the Grey-elves of Mithrim; entered 
Gondolin bearing the message of Ulmo; wedded Idril Turgon’s daughter, 
and with her and their son Earendil escaped from the destruction of the city; 
in his ship Earrame set sail into the West. 

Turambar ‘Master of Doom’, the last name taken by Turin, during his days 
in the Forest of Brethil. 

Turgon Called the Wise; the second son of Fingolfin; dwelt at Vinyamar in 
Nevrast before he departed in secret to Gondolin, which he ruled until his 
death in the sack of the city; father of Idril the mother of Earendil: called 
(like Thingol) the Hidden King. 

Tur Haretha The burial-mound of the Lady Haleth in the Forest of Brethil 
(see Haudh-en-Arwen). 

Turin Son of Hurin and Morwen; chief subject of the lay named Nam i Hm 
Hurin from which Chapter 21 was derived. For his other names see 
Neithan, Gorthol, Agarwaen, Mormegil, Wildman of the Woods, Turambar. 
Twilight Meres See Aelin-uial. 

Two Kindreds Elves and Men. 

Two Trees of Valinor. 

Uinen A Maia, the Lady of the Seas, spouse of Osse. 

Ulairi See Ring-wraiths. 

Uldor Called the Accursed; son of Ulfang the Black; slain by Maglor in the 
Nirnaeth Arnoediad. 

Ulfang Called the Black; a chieftain of the Easterlings, who with his three 
sons followed Caranthir, and proved faithless in the Nirnaeth Arnoediad. 
Ulfast Son of Ulfang the Black, slain by the sons of Bor in the Nirnaeth 
Arnoediad. 

Ulmo A Vala, one of the Aratar, called Lord of Waters and King of the Sea. 
The name was interpreted by the Eldar to mean ‘The Pourer’ or ‘The 
Rainer’. 

Ulumuri The great horns of Ulmo made by the Maia Sal 

Ulwarth Son of Ulfang the Black, slain by the sons of Bor in the Nirnaeth 

Arnoediad. 

Umanyar Name given to those Elves who went on the westward journey 
from Cuivienen but did not reach Aman: ‘Those not of Aman’, beside 
Amanyar ‘Those of Aman’. 

Umarth ‘Ill-fate’, a fictitious name for his father given out by Turin in 
Nargothrond. 

Umbar Great natural haven and fortress of the Numenoreans south of the 



Bay of Belfalas. 

Undying Lands Aman and Eressea; also called the Deathless Lands. 
Ungoliant The great spider, destroyer with Melkor of the Trees of Valinor. 
Shelob in The Lord of the Rings was ‘the last child of Ungoliant to trouble 
the unhappy world’ ( The Two Towers IV 9). 

Union of Maedhros The league formed by Maedhros to defeat Morgoth that 
ended in the Nirnaeth Arnoediad. 

Urthel One of the twelve companions of Barahir on Dorthonion. 

Uruloki Quenya word meaning ‘fire-serpent’, dragon. 

Utumno The first great stronghold of Melkor, in the north of Middle-earth, 
destroyed by the Valar. 

Vaire ‘The Weaver’, one of the Valier, the spouse of Namo Mandos. 
Valacirca ‘The Sickle of the Valar’, name of the constellation of the Great 
Bear. 

Valandil Youngest son of Isildur; third King of Arnor. 

Valaquenta ‘Account of the Valar’, a short work treated as a separate entity 
from The Silmarillion proper. 

Valar ‘Those with Power’, ‘The Powers’ (singular Vala ); name given to 
those great Ainur who entered into Ea at the beginning of Time, and 
assumed the function of guarding and governing Arda. Called also the 
Great Ones, the Rulers of Arda, the Lords of the West, the Lords of Valinor. 
Passim; see also Ainur, Aratar. 

Valaraukar ‘Demons of Might’ (singular Valarauko), Quenya form 
corresponding to Sindarin Balrog. 

Valaroma The horn of the Vala Orome. 

Valier ‘The Queens of the Valar’ (singular Valie ); a term used only in the 
Valaquenta. 

Valimar See Valmar. 

Valinor The land of the Valar in Aman, beyond the mountains of the Pelori; 
also called the Guarded Realm. 

Valmar The city of the Valar in Valinor; the name also occurs in the form 
Valimar. In Galadriel’s lament in Lorien ( The Fellowship of the Ring II 8) 
Valimar is made equivalent to Valinor. 

Vana One of the Valier, the sister of Yavanna and spouse of Orome; called 
the Ever-young. 

Vanyar The first host of the Eldar on the westward journey from Cuivienen, 
led by Ingwe. The name (singular Vanya) means ‘the Fair’, referring to the 
golden hair of the Vanyar; see Finarfin. 



Varda The Exalted’, The Lofty’; also called the Lady of the Stars. Greatest 
of the Valier, the spouse of Manwe, dwelling with him on Taniquetil. Other 
names of Varda, as maker of the Stars, were Elbereth, Elentari, Tintalle. 
Vasa The Consumer’, a name of the Sun among the Noldor. 

Vdya One of the Three Rings of the Elves, the Ring of Air, borne by Gil- 
galad and afterwards by Elrond; also called The Ring of Sapphire. 

Vmgilot (In full Quenya form Vmgilote ). Toam-flower’, the name of 
Earendil’s ship; see Rothinzil. 

Vinyamar The house of Turgon in Nevrast under Mount Taras. The meaning 
is probably ‘New Dwelling’. 

Voronwe The Steadfast’, Elf of Gondolin, the only mariner to survive from 
the seven ships sent into the West after the Nirnaeth Arnoediad; met with 
Tuor at Vinyamar and guided him to Gondolin. 

Westernesse See Anadune, Numenor. 

White Council The Council of the Wise in the Third Age formed to oppose 
Sauron. 

White Mountain See Taniquetil. 

White Tree See Telperion, Galathilion, Nimloth (1). The White Trees of 
Minas Ithil and Minas Anor. 

Wildman of the Woods Name adopted by Turin when he first came among 
the Men of Brethil. 

Wilwarin Name of a constellation. The word meant ‘butterfly’ in Quenya, 
and the constellation was perhaps Cassiopeia. 

Wizards See Istari. 

Woodland Elves See Silvan Elves. 

Yavanna ‘Giver of fruits’; one of the Valier, numbered among the Aratar; 
the spouse of Aule; called also Kementari. 

Year of Lamentation The year of the Nirnaeth Arnoediad. 



APPENDIX 



ELEMENTS IN QUENYA AND SINDARIN NAMES 


These notes have been compiled for those who take an interest in the Eldarin 
languages, and The Lord of the Rings is extensively drawn upon for illustration. 
They are necessarily very compressed, giving an air of certainty and finality that 
is not altogether justified; and they are very selective, this depending both on 
considerations of length and the limitations of the editor’s knowledge. The 
headings are not arranged systematically by roots or in Quenya or Sindarin 
forms, but somewhat arbitrarily, the aim being to make the component elements 
of names as readily identifiable as possible. 

adan (plural Edain ) in Adanedhel, Aradan, Dunedain. For its meaning and 

history see Atani in the Index. 

aelin ‘lake, pool’ in Aelin-uial; cf. lin (I). 

aglar ‘glory, brilliance’ in Dagor Aglareb, Aglarond. The form in Quenya, 
alkar, has transposition of the consonants: to Sindarin aglareb corresponds 
Alkarinque. The root is kal-‘ shine’, q.v. 
aina ‘holy’ in Amur, Ainulindale. 

alda ‘tree’ (Quenya) in Aldaron, Aldudenie, Malinalda, corresponding to 
Sindarin galadh (seen in Caras Galadhon and the Galadhrim of 
Lothlorien). 

alqua ‘swan’ (Sindarin alph ) in Alqualonde; from a root alak-‘ rushing’ 
occurring also in Ancalagon. 

amarth ‘doom’ in Amon Amarth, Cabed Naer amarth,Umarth, and in the 
Sindarin form of Turin’s name ‘Master of Doom’, Turamarth. The Quenya 
form of the word appears in Turambar. 

amon ‘hill’, a Sindarin word occurring as the first element of many names; 
plural emyn in Emyn Beraid. 

anca ‘jaws’ in Ancalagon (for the second element in this name see alqua). 
an(d) ‘long’ in Andram, Anduin; also in Anfalas (‘Langstrand’) in Gondor, 
Cair Andros (‘ship of long-foam’) an island in Anduin, and Angerthas ‘long 
rune-rows’. 

andune ‘sunset, west’ in Andunie, to which corresponds in Sindarin annun, 
cf. Annuminas, and Henneth Annun ‘window of the sunset’ in Ithilien. The 
ancient root of these words, ndu, meaning ‘down, from on high’, appears 
also in Quenya numen ‘the way of the sunset, west’ and in Sindarin dun 
‘west’, cf. Dunedain. Adunaic adun in Adunakhor, Anadune was a loan 
from Eldarin speech. 



anga ‘iron’, Sindarin ang, in Angainor, Angband, Anghabar, Anglachel, 
Angrist, Angrod, Anguirel, Gurthang; angren ‘of iron’ in Angrenost, plural 
engrin in Ered Engrin. 

anna ‘gift’ in Annatar, Melian, Yavanna; the same stem in Andor ‘Land of 
Gift’. 

annon ‘great door or gate’, plural ennyn, in Annon-in-Gelydh; cf. 
Morannon the ‘Black Gate’ of Mordor and Sirannon the ‘Gate-stream’ of 
Moria. 

ar- ‘beside, outside’ (whence Quenya ar ‘and’, Sindarin a), probably in 
Araman ‘outside Aman’; cf. also (Nirnaeth) Arnoediad ‘(Tears) without 
reckoning’. 

ar(a)- ‘high, noble, royal’ appears in a great many names, as Aradan, 
Aredhel, Argonath, Amor, etc.; extended stem arat- appearing in Aratar, 
and in arato ‘champion, eminent man’, e.g. Angrod from Angarato and 
Finrod from Findarato; also aran ‘king’ in Aranruth. Ereinion ‘scion of 
kings’ (name of Gil-galad) has the plural of aran; cf. Fornost Erain ‘Nor- 
bury of the Kings’ in Arnor. The prefix Ar- of the Adunaic names of the 
Kings of Numenor was derived from this. 

arien (the Maia of the Sun) is derived from a root as- seen also in Quenya 
are ‘sunlight’. 

atar ‘father’ in Atanatari (see Atani in Index), Iluvatar. 

band ‘prison, duress’ in Angband; from original mbando, of which the 
Quenya form appears in Mandos (Sindarin Ang-band = Quenya 
Angamando ). 

bar ‘dwelling’ in Bar-en-Danwedh. The ancient word mbar (Quenya mar, 
Sindarin bar ) meant the ‘home’ both of persons and of peoples, and thus 
appears in many place-names, as Brithombar, Dimbar (the first element of 
which means ‘sad, gloomy’), Eldamar, Val(i)mar, Vmyamar, Marnu- 
Falmar. Mardil, name of the first of the Ruling Stewards of Gondor, means 
‘devoted to the house’ (i.e. of the Kings). 

barad ‘tower’ in Barad-dur, Barad Eithel, Barad Nimras; the plural in 
Emyn Beraid. 

beleg ‘mighty’ in Beleg, Belegaer, Belegost, Laer Cu Beleg. 
bragol ‘sudden’ in Dagor Bragollach. 

brethil probably means ‘silver birch’; cf. Nimbrethil the birch-woods in 
Arvernien, and Fimbrethil, one of the Entwives. 
brith ‘gravel’ in Brithiach, Brithombar, Brithon. 



(For many names beginning with C see entries under K ) 


calen (galen) the usual Sindarin word for ‘green’, in Ard-galen, Tol Galen, 
Calenardhon; also in Parth Galen (‘Green Sward’) beside Anduin and 
Pinnath Gelin (‘Green Ridges’) in Gondor. See kal-. 

cam (from kamba ) ‘hand’, but specifically of the hand held cupped in the 
attitude of receiving or holding, in Camlost, Erchamion. 
carak- This root is seen in Quenya carca ‘fang’, of which the Sindarin 
form carch occurs in Carcharoth, and also in Carchost (‘Fang Fort’, one of 
the Towers of the Teeth at the entrance to Mordor). Cf. Caragdur, Carach 
Angren (‘Iron Jaws’, the rampart and dike guarding the entrance to Udun in 
Mordor), and Helcaraxe. 

caran ‘red’, Quenya came, in Caranthir, Carnil, Orocarni; also in 
Caradhras, from caran-rass, the ‘Red-horn’ in the Misty Mountains, and 
Carnimirie ‘red-jewelled’, the rowan-tree in Quickbeam’s song. The 
translation of Carcharoth in the text as ‘Red Maw’ must depend on 
association with this word; see carak-. 

celeb ‘silver’ (Quenya telep, telpe, as in Telperion ) in Celeborn, 
Celebrant, Celebros. Celebrimbor means ‘silver-fist’, from the adjective 
celebrin ‘silver’ (meaning not ‘made of silver’ but ‘like silver, in hue or 
worth’) and paur (Quenya quare) ‘fist’, often used to mean ‘hand’; the 
Quenya form of the name was Telperinquar. Celebrindal has celebrin and 
tal, dal ‘foot’. 

coron ‘mound’ in Corollaire (also called Coron Oiolaire, which latter 
word means ‘Ever-summer’, cf. Oiolosse ); cf. Cerin Amroth, the great 
mound in Lothlorien. 

cu ‘bow’ in Cuthalion, Dor Cuarthol, Laer Cu Beleg. 

cuivie ‘awakening’ in Cuivienen (Sindarin Nen Echui). Other derivatives 

of the same root are Dor Firn-i-Guinar; coire, the first beginning of Spring, 

Sindarin echuir, The Lord of the Rings Appendix D; and coimas ‘life- 

bread’, Quenya name of lembas. 

cul- ‘golden-red’ in Culurien. 

curu ‘skill’ in Curufin(we), Curunir. 

dae ‘shadow’ in Dor Daedeloth, and perhaps in Daeron. 

dagor ‘battle’; the root is ndak-, cf. Haudh-en-Ndengin. Another 

derivative is Dagnir (Dagnir Glaurunga ‘Glaurung’s Bane’). 

del ‘horror’ in Delduwath; deloth ‘abhorrence’ in Dor Daedeloth. 

dm ‘silent’ in Dor Dmen; cf. Rath Dmen, the Silent Street in Minas Tirith, 



and Amon Dm, one of the beacon-hills of Gondor. 

dol ‘head’ in Lorindol; often applied to hills and mountains, as in Dol 
Guldur, Dolmed, Mindolluin (also Nardol, one of the beacon-hills of 
Gondor, and Fanuidhol, one of the Mountains of Moria). 
dor ‘land’ (i.e. dry land as opposed to sea) was derived from ndor; it 
occurs in many Sindarin names, as Doriath, Dorthonion, Eriador, Gondor, 
Mordor, etc. In Quenya the stem was blended and confused with a quite 
distinct word nore meaning ‘people’; in origin Valinore was strictly ‘the 
people of the Valar’, but Valandor ‘the land of the Valar’, and similarly 
Numen(n)ore ‘people of the West’, but Numendor ‘land of the West’. 
Quenya Endor ‘Middle-earth’ was from ened ‘middle’ and ndor; this in 
Sindarin became Ennor (cf. ennorath ‘middle lands’ in the chant A Elbereth 
Gilthoniel ). 

draug ‘wolf’ in Draugluin. 

du ‘night, dimness’ in Delduwath, Ephel Duath. Derived from earlier 
dome, whence Quenya lome; thus Sindarin dulin ‘nightingale’ corresponds 
to lomelinde. 

duin ‘(long) river’ in Anduin, Baranduin, Esgalduin, Malduin, Taur-im- 
Duinath. 

dur ‘dark’ in Barad-dur, Caragdur, Dol Guldur; also in Durthang (a castle 
in Mordor). 

ear ‘sea’ (Quenya) in Earendil, Earrame, and many other names. The 
Sindarin word gaer (in Belegaer ) is apparently derived from the same 
original stem. 

echor in Echoriath ‘Encircling Mountains’ and Orfalch Echor; cf. 
Rammas Echor ‘the great wall of the outer circle’ about the Pelennor Fields 
at Minas Tirith. 

edhel ‘elf’ (Sindarin) in Adanedhel, Aredhel, Gloredhel, Ost-in-Edhil; also 
in Peredhil ‘Half-elven’. 

eithel ‘well’ in Eithel Ivrin, Eithel Sirion, Barad Eithel; also in Mitheithel, 
the river Hoarwell in Eriador (named from its source). See kel-. 
el, elen ‘star’. According to Elvish legend, e/e was a primitive exclamation 
‘behold!’ made by the Elves when they first saw the stars. From this origin 
derived the ancient words el and elen, meaning ‘star’, and the adjectives 
elda and elena, meaning ‘of the stars’. These elements appear in a great 
many names. For the later use of the name Eldar see the Index. The 
Sindarin equivalent of Elda was Edhel (plural Edhil), q.v.; but the strictly 
corresponding form was Eledh, which occurs in Eledhwen. 



er ‘one, alone’, in Amon Ereb (cf. Erebor, the Lonely Mountain), 

Erchamion, Eressea, Eru. 

ereg ‘thorn, holly’ in Eregion, Region. 

esgal ‘screen, hiding’ in Esgalduin. 

falas ‘shore, line of surf’ (Quenya falasse ) in Falas, Belfalas; also Anfalas 
in Gondor. Cf. Falathar, Falathrim. Another derivative from the root was 
Quenya falma ‘(crested) wave’, whence Falmari, Mar-nu-Falmar. 
faroth is derived from a root meaning ‘hunt, pursue’; in the Lay of 
Leithian the Taur-en-Faroth above Nargothrond are called ‘the Hills of the 
Hunters’. 

faug- ‘gape’ in Anfauglir, Anfauglith, Dor-nu-Fauglith. 

fea ‘spirit’ in Feanor, Feanturi. 

fin- ‘hair’ in Finduilas, Fingon, Finrod, Glorfindel. 

formen ‘north’ (Quenya) in Formenos; Sindarin forn (also for, forod ) in 
Fornost. 

fuin ‘gloom, darkness’ (Quenya huine) in Fuinur, Taur-nu-Fuin. 

gaer ‘sea’ in Belegaer (and in Gaerys, Sindarin name of Osse). Said to 
derive from the stem gaya ‘awe, dread’, and to have been the name made 
for the vast and terrifying Great Sea when the Eldar first came to its shores. 
gaur ‘werewolf’ (from a root ngwaw- ‘howl’) in Tol-in-Gaurhoth. 
gil ‘star’ in Dagor-nuin-Giliath, Osgiliath (giliath ‘host of stars’); Gil- 
Estel, Gil-galad. 

girith ‘shuddering’ in Nen Girith; cf. also Girithron, name of the last 

month of the year in Sindarin ( The Lord of the Rings Appendix D). 

glm ‘gleam’ (particularly applied to the eyes) in Maeglin. 

golodh is the Sindarin form of Quenya Noldo; see gul. Plural Golodhrim, 

and Gelydh (in Annon-in-Gelydh). 

gond ‘stone’ in Gondolin, Gondor, Gonnhirrim, Argonath, seregon. The 
name of the hidden city of King Turgon was devised by him in Quenya as 
Ondolinde (Quenya ondo = Sindarin gond, and Unde ‘singing, song’); but it 
was known always in legend in the Sindarin form Gondolin, which was 
probably interpreted as gond-dolen ‘Hidden Rock’. 

gor ‘horror, dread’ in Gorthaur, Gorthol; goroth of the same meaning, 
with reduplicated gor, in Gorgoroth, Ered Gorgoroth. 
groth (grod) ‘delving, underground dwelling’ in Menegroth, Nogrod 
(probably also in Nimrodel, ‘lady of the white cave’). Nogrod was 
originally Novrod ‘hollow delving’ (hence the translation Hollowbold ), but 



was altered under the influence of naug 'dwarf 5 . 

gul 'sorcery 5 in Dol Guldur, Minas Morgul. This word was derived from 

the same ancient stem ngol- that appears in Noldor; cf. Quenya nole 'long 

study, lore, knowledge 5 . But the Sindarin word was darkened in sense by its 

frequent use in the compound morgul ‘black arts 5 . 

gurth ‘death 5 in Gurthang (see also Melkor in the Index). 

gwaith ‘people 5 in Gwaith-i-Mirdain; cf. Enedwaith ‘Middle-folk 5 , name 

of the land between the Greyflood and the Isen. 

gwath, wath ‘shadow 5 in Delduwath, Ephel Duath; also in Gwathlo, the 
river Greyflood in Eriador. Related forms in Ered Wethrin, Thuringwethil. 
(This Sindarin word referred to dim light, not to the shadows of objects cast 
by light: these were called morchaint ‘dark shapes 5 .) 

hadhod in Hadhodrond (translation of Khazad-dum ) was a rendering of 
Khazad into Sindarin sounds. 

haudh ‘mound 5 in Haudh-en-Arwen, Haudh-en-Elleth, etc. 
heru ‘lord 5 in Herumor, Herunumen; Sindarin hir in Gonnhirrim, 
Rohirrim, Barahir; hfril ‘lady 5 in Hirilom. 
him ‘cool 5 in Himlad (and Himring ?). 

hini ‘children 5 in Eruhmi ‘Children of Eru 5 ; Nam i Hin Hurin. 

hith ‘mist 5 in Hithaeglir, Hithlum (also in Nen Hithoel, a lake in Anduin). 

Hithlum is Sindarin in form, adapted from the Quenya name Hisilome given 

by the Noldorin exiles (Quenya hisie ‘mist 5 , cf. Hisime, the name of the 

eleventh month of the year, The Lord of the Rings Appendix D). 

hoth ‘host, horde 5 (nearly always in a bad sense) in Tol-in-Gaurhoth; also 

in Loss(h)oth, the Snowmen of Forochel ( The Lord of the Rings Appendix 

A (I, iii)) and Glamhoth ‘din-horde 5 , a name for Ores. 

hyarmen ‘south 5 (Quenya) in Hyarmentir, Sindarin har-, ham, harad. 

id ‘void, abyss 5 in Moria. 
iant ‘bridge 5 in Iant laur. 
lath ‘fence 5 in Doriath. 

iaur ‘old 5 in Iant laur; cf. the Elvish name of Bombadil, Iarwain. 
ilm- This stem appears in Ilmen, Ilmare, and also in Ilmarin (‘mansion of 
the high airs 5 , the dwelling of Manwe and Varda upon Oiolosse). 
iluve ‘the whole, the all 5 in Iluvatar. 

kal- (gal-) This root, meaning ‘shine 5 , appears in Calacirya, Calaquendi, 
Tar-calion; galvorn, Gil-galad, Galadriel. The last two names have no 



connexion with Sindarin galadh ‘tree’, although in the case of Galadriel 
such a connexion was often made, and the name altered to Galadhriel. In 
the High-elven speech her name was Al(a)tariel, derived from alata 
‘radiance 5 (Sindarin galad ) and riel ‘garlanded maiden 5 (from a root rig- 
‘twine, wreathe 5 ): the whole meaning ‘maiden crowned with a radiant 
garland 5 , referring to her hair, calen (galen) ‘green 5 is etymologically 
‘bright 5 , and derives from this root; see also aglar. 

kano ‘commander 5 : this Quenya word is the origin of the second element 
in Fingon and Turgon. 

kel- ‘go away 5 , of water ‘flow away, flow down 5 , in Celon; from et-kele 
‘issue of water, spring 5 was derived, with transposition of the consonants, 
Quenya ehtele, Sindarin eithel. 

kemen ‘earth 5 in Kementari; a Quenya word referring to the earth as a flat 
floor beneath menel, the heavens. 

khelek- ‘ice 5 in Helcar, Helcaraxe (Quenya helka ‘icy, ice-cold 5 ). But in 
Helevorn the first element is Sindarin heledh ‘glass 5 , taken from Khuzdul 
kheled (cf. Kheled-zaram ‘Mirrormere’); Helevorn means ‘black glass 5 (cf. 
galvorn). 

khil- ‘follow 5 in Hildor, Hildorien, Eluchil. 

kir- ‘cut, cleave 5 in Calacirya, Cirth, Angerthas, Cirith ( Ninniach, 
Thoronath ). From the sense ‘pass swiftly through 5 was derived Quenya 
dry a ‘sharp-prowed ship 5 (cf. English cutter), and this meaning appears 
also in Cirdan, Tar-Ciryatan, and no doubt in the name of Isildur’s son 
Ciryon. 

lad ‘plain, valley 5 in Dagorlad, Himlad; imlad a narrow valley with steep 
sides, in Imladris (cf. also Imlad Morgul in the Ephel Duath). 
laure ‘gold 5 (but of light and colour, not of the metal) in Laurelin; the 
Sindarin forms in Gloredhel, Glorfindel, Loeg Ningloron, Lorindol, 
Rathloriel. 

lhach ‘leaping flame 5 in Dagor Bragollach, and probably in Anglachel 
(the sword made by Eol of meteoritic iron). 

lin (1) ‘pool, mere 5 in Linaewen (which contains aew (Quenya aiwe) 
‘small bird 5 ), Teiglin; cf. aelin. 

lin- (2) This root, meaning ‘sing, make a musical sound 5 , occurs in 
Ainulindale, Laurelin, Lindar, Lindon, Ered Lindon, lomelindi. 
lith ‘ash 5 in Anfauglith, Dor-nu-Fauglith; also in Ered Lithui, the Ashen 
Mountains, forming the northern border of Mordor, and Lithlad ‘Plain of 
Ashes 5 at the feet of Ered Lithui. 



lok- 'bend, loop’ in Uruloki (Quenya (h)loke 'snake, serpent’, Sindarin 
Ihug). 

lom ‘echo’ in Dor-lomin, Ered Lomin; related are Lammoth, Lanthir 
Lamath. 

lome ‘dusk’ in Lomion, lomelindi; see du. 

londe ‘land-locked haven’ in Alqualonde; the Sindarin form lond ( lonn ) in 
Mithlond. 

los ‘snow’ in Oiolosse (Quenya oio ‘ever’ and losse ‘snow, snow-white’); 
Sindarin loss in Amon Uilos and Aeglos. 

loth ‘flower’ in Lothlorien, Nimloth; Quenya lote in Ninquelote, Vmgilote. 
luin ‘blue’ in Ered Luin, Helluin, Luinil, Mindolluin. 

maeg ‘sharp, piercing’ (Quenya maika ) in Maeglin. 

mal- ‘gold’ in Malduin, Malinalda; also in mallorn, and in the Field of 
Cormallen, which means ‘golden circle’ and was named from the 
culumalda trees that grew there (see cul-). 

man- ‘good, blessed, unmarred’ in Aman, Manwe; derivatives of Aman in 
Amandil, Araman,Umanyar. 

mel- ‘love’ in Melian (from Melyanna ‘dear gift’); this stem is seen also in 
the Sindarin word mellon ‘friend’ in the inscription on the West-gate of 
Moria. 

men ‘way’ in Numen, Hyarmen, Romen, Formen. 

menel ‘the heavens’ in Meneldil, Menelmacar, Meneltarma. 

mereth ‘feast’ in Mereth Aderthad; also in Merethrond, the Hall of Feasts 

in Minas Tirith. 

minas ‘tower’ in Annuminas, Minas Anor, Minas Tirith, etc. The same 
stem occurs in other words referring to isolated, prominent, things, e.g. 
Mindolluin, Mindon; probably related is Quenya minya ‘first’ (cf. Tar- 
Minyatur, the name of Elros as first King of Numenor). 
mir ‘jewel’ (Quenya mire) in Elemmrre, Gwaith-i-Mirdain, Miriel, 
Nauglamir, Tar-Atanamir. 

mith ‘grey’ in Mithlond, Mithrandir, Mithrim; also in Mitheithel, the river 
Hoarwell in Eriador. 

mor ‘dark’ in Mordor, Morgoth, Moria, Moriquendi, Mormegil, Morwen, 
etc. 

moth ‘dusk’ in Nan Elmoth. 

nan(d) ‘valley’ in Nan Dungortheb, Nan Elmoth, Nan Tathren. 

nar ‘fire’ in Narsil, Narya; present also in the original forms of Aegnor 



(Aikanaro ‘Sharp Flame’ or ‘Fell Fire’) and Feanor (Feanaro ‘Spirit of 
Fire’). The Sindarin form was naur, as in Sammath Naur, the Chambers of 
Fire in Orodruin. Derived from the same ancient root (a)nar was the name 
of the Sun, Quenya Anar (also in Anarion ), Sindarin Anor (cf. Minas Anor, 
Anorien ). 

naug ‘dwarf’ in Naugrim; see also Nogrod in entry groth. Related is 
another Sindarin word for ‘dwarf’, nogoth, plural noegyth (Noegyth Nibin 
‘Petty-dwarves’) and nogothrim. 

-(n)dil is a very frequent ending of personal names, Amandil, Earendil 
(shortened Earnil ), Elendil, Mardil, etc.; it implies ‘devotion’, ‘disinterested 
love’ (see Mardil in entry bar). 

-(n)dur in names such as Earendur (shortened Earnur) is similar in 
meaning to -(n)dil. 

neldor ‘beech’ in Neldoreth; but it seems that this was properly the name 
of Hirilorn, the great beech-tree with three trunks ( nelde ‘three’ and orn). 
nen ‘water’, used of lakes, pools, and lesser rivers, in Nen Girith, Nenning, 
Nenuial, Nenya; Cuivienen, Uinen; also in many names in The Lord of the 
Rings, as Nen Hithoel, Bruinen, Emyn Amen, Nurnen. Nin ‘wet’ in Loeg 
Ningloron; also in Nindalf. 

nim ‘white’ (from earlier nimf, nimp ) in Nimbrethil, Nimloth, Nimphelos, 
niphredil (niphred ‘pallor’), Barad Nimras, Ered Nimrais. The Quenya 
form was ninque; thus Ninquelote = Nimloth. Cf. also Taniquetil. 

orn ‘tree’ in Celeborn, Hirilorn; cf. Fangorn ‘Treebeard’, and mallorn, 
plural mellyrn, the trees of Lothlorien. 

orod ‘mountain’ in Orodruin, Thangorodrim; Orocarni, Oromet. Plural 
ered in Ered Engrin, Ered Lindon, etc. 

os(t) ‘fortress’ in Angrenost, Belegost, Formenos, Fornost, Mandos, 
Nargothrond (from Narog-ost-rond ), Os(t)giliath, Ost-in-Edhil. 

palan (Quenya) ‘far and wide’ in palantiri, Tar-Palantir. 
pel- ‘go round, encircle’ in Pelargir, Pelori, and in the Pelennor, the 
‘fenced land’ of Minas Tirith; also in Ephel Brandir, Ephel Duath (ephel 
from et-pel ‘outer fence’). 

quen- (quet-) ‘say, speak’ in Quendi ( Calaquendi, Laiquendi, Moriquendi), 
Quenya, Valaquenta, Quenta Silmarillion. The Sindarin forms have p (or b ) 
for qu; e.g. pedo ‘speak’ in the inscription on the West-gate of Moria, 
corresponding to the Quenya stem quet-, and Gandalf’s words before the 



gate, lasto beth lammen ‘listen to the words of my tongue’, where beth 
‘word’ corresponds to Quenya quetta. 

ram ‘wall’ (Quenya ramba) in Andram, Ramdal; also in Rammas Echor, 
the wall about the Pelennor Fields at Minas Tirith. 

ran- ‘wander, stray’ in Rana, the Moon, and in Mithrandir, Aerandir; also 
in the river Gilraen in Gondor. 

rant ‘course’ in the river-names Adurant (with adu ‘double’) and 
Celebrant (‘Silverlode’). 

ras ‘horn’ in Barad Nimras, also in Caradhras (‘Redhorn’) and Methedras 
(‘Last Peak’) in the Misty Mountains; plural rais in Ered Nimrais. 
rauko ‘demon’ in Valaraukar; Sindarin raug, rog in Balrog. 
ril ‘brilliance’ in Idril, Silmaril; also in Anduril (the sword of Aragorn) and 
in mithril (Moria-silver). Idril’s name in Quenya form was Itarille (or 
Itarilde), from a stem ita-‘ sparkle’. 

rim ‘great number, host’ (Quenya rimbe) was commonly used to form 
collective plurals, as Golodhrim, Mithrim (see the Index), Naugrim, 
Thangorodrim, etc. 

ring ‘cold, chill’ in Ringil, Ringwil, Himring; also in the river Ringlo in 
Gondor, and in Ringare, Quenya name of the last month of the year ( The 
Lord of the Rings Appendix D). 

ris ‘cleave’ appears to have blended with the stem kris- of similar meaning 
(a derivative of the root kir- ‘cleave, cut’, q.v.); hence Angrist (also Orcrist 
‘Orc-cleaver’, the sword of Thorin Oakenshield), Crissaegrim, Imladris. 
roch ‘horse’ (Quenya rokko) in Rochallor, Rohan (from Rochand ‘land of 
horses’), Rohirrim; also in Roheryn ‘horse of the lady’ (cf. heru), Aragorn’s 
horse, which was so called because given to him by Arwen ( The Return of 
the King V 2). 

rom- A stem used of the sound of trumpets and horns which appears in 
Orome and Valaroma; cf. Bema, the name of this Vala in the language of 
Rohan as translated into Anglo-Saxon in The Lord of the Rings Appendix A 
(II): Anglo-Saxon beme ‘trumpet’. 

romen ‘uprising, sunrise, east’ (Quenya) in Romenna. The Sindarin words 
for ‘east’, rhun (in Talath Rhunen ) and amrun, were of the same origin. 
rond meant a vaulted or arched roof, or a large hall or chamber so roofed; 
so Nargothrond (see ost ), Hadhodrond, Aglarond. It could be applied to the 
heavens, hence the name Elrond ‘star-dome’. 

ros ‘foam, spindrift, spray’ in Celebros, Elros, Rauros; also in Cair 
Andros, an island in the river Anduin. 



ruin ‘red flame’ (Quenya runya ) in Orodruin. 
ruth ‘anger’ in Aranruth. 

sarn ‘(small) stone’ in Sam Athrad (Sam Ford on the Brandywine is a 
half-translation of this); also in Sam Gebir (‘stone-spikes’: ceber, plural 
cebir ‘stakes’), rapids in the river Anduin. A derivative is Semi, a river in 
Gondor. 

sereg ‘blood’ (Quenya serke ) in seregon. 

sil- (and variant th/7-) ‘shine (with white or silver light)’ in Belthil, 
Galathilion, Silpion, and in Quenya Isil, Sindarin Ithil, the Moon (whence 
Isildur, Narsil; Minas Ithil, Ithilien). The Quenya word Silmarilli is said to 
derive from the name silima that Feanor gave to the substance from which 
they were made. 

sir ‘river’, from root sir- ‘flow’, in Ossiriand (the first element is from the 
stem of the numeral ‘seven’, Quenya otso, Sindarin odo ), Sirion; also in 
Sirannon (the ‘Gate-stream’ of Moria) and Sirith (‘a flowing’, as tirith 
‘watching’ from tir), a river in Gondor. With change of s to h in the middle 
of words it is present in Minhiriath ‘between the rivers’, the region between 
the Brandywine and the Greyflood; in Nanduhirion ‘vale of dim streams’, 
the Dimrill Dale (see nan(d) and du); and in Ethir Anduin, the outflow or 
delta of Anduin (from et-sir ). 

sul ‘wind’ in Amon Sul, Sulimo; cf. Sulime, Quenya name of the third 
month of the year ( The Lord of the Rings Appendix D). 

tal (dal) ‘foot’ in Celebrindal, and with the meaning ‘end’ in Ramdal. 

talath ‘flat lands, plain’ in Talath Dirnen, Talath Rhunen. 

tar- ‘high’ (Quenya tara ‘lofty’), prefix of the Quenya names of the 

Numenorean Kings; also in Annatar. Feminine tari ‘she that is high, Queen’ 

in Elentari, Kementari. Cf. tarma ‘pillar’ in Meneltarma. 

tathar ‘willow’; adjective tathren in Nan-tathren; Quenya tasare in 

Tasarinan, Nan-tasarion (see Nan-tathren in the Index). 

taur ‘wood, forest’ (Quenya taure ) in Tauron, Taur-im-Duinath, Taur-nu- 

Fuin. 

tel- ‘finish, end, be last’ in Teleri. 

thalion ‘strong, dauntless’ in Cuthalion, Thalion. 

thang ‘oppression’ in Thangorodrim, also in Durthang (a castle in 
Mordor). Quenya sanga meant ‘press, throng’, whence Sangahyando 
‘Throng-cleaver’, name of a man in Gondor ( The Lord of the Rings 
Appendix A (I, iv)). 



thar- ‘athwart, across’ in Sam Athrad, Thargelion; also in Tharbad (from 
thara-pata ‘crossway’) where the ancient road from Arnor and Gondor 
crossed the Greyflood. 

thaur ‘abominable, abhorrent’ in Sauron (from Thauron), Gorthaur. 
thin(d) ‘grey’ in Thingol; Quenya sinda in Sindar, Singollo ( Sindacollo : 
collo ‘cloak’). 

thol ‘helm’ in Dor Cuarthol, Gorthol. 
thon ‘pine-tree’ in Dorthonion. 

thoron ‘eagle’ in Thorondor (Quenya Sorontar ), CirithThoronath. The 
Quenya form is perhaps present in the constellation-name Soronume. 
til ‘point, horn’ in Taniquetil, Tilion (‘the Horned’); also in Celebdil 
‘Silvertine’, one of the Mountains of Moria. 

tin- ‘sparkle’ (Quenya tinta ‘cause to sparkle’, tinwe ‘spark’) in Tintalle; 
also in tindome ‘starry twilight’ ( The Lord of the Rings Appendix D), 
whence tindomerel ‘daughter of the twilight’, a poetic name for the 
nightingale (Sindarin Tinuviel). It appears also in Sindarin ithildin 
‘starmoon’, the substance of which the devices on the West-gate of Moria 
were made. 

tir ‘watch, watch over’ in Minas Tirith, palantiri, Tar-Palantir, Tirion. 
tol ‘isle’ (rising with sheer sides from the sea or from a river) in Tol 
Eressea, Tol Galen, etc. 

turn ‘valley’ in Tumhalad, Tumladen; Quenya tumbo (cf. Tree-beard’s 
tumbalemorna ‘black deep valley’, The Two Towers III 4). Cf. Utumno, 
Sindarin Udun (Gandalf in Moria named the Balrog ‘Flame of Udun’), a 
name afterwards used of the deep dale in Mordor between the Morannon 
and the Isenmouthe. 

tur ‘power, mastery’ in Turambar, Turgon, Turin, Feanturi, Tar-Minyatur . 
uial ‘twilight’ in Aelin-uial, Nenuial. 

ur- ‘heat, be hot’ in Uroloki; cf. Urime and Urui, Quenya and Sindarin 
names of the eighth month of the year ( The Lord of the Rings Appendix D). 
Related is the Quenya word aure ‘sunlight, day’ (cf. Fingon’s cry before the 
Nirnaeth Arnoediad), Sindarin aur, which in the form Or- is prefixed to the 
names of the days of the week. 

val- ‘power’ in Valar, Valacirca, Valaquenta, Valaraukar, Val(i)-mar, 
Valinor. The original stem was bal-, preserved in Sindarin Balan, plural 
Belain, the Valar, and in Balrog. 



wen ‘maiden’ is a frequent ending, as in Earwen, Morwen. 

wing ‘foam, spray’ in Elwing, Vmgelot (and only in these two names). 

yave ‘fruit’ (Quenya) in Yavanna; cf. Yavannie, Quenya name of the ninth 
month of the year, and yavie ‘autumn’ ( The Lord of the Rings Appendix D). 



MAPS 




















gp§§|gl 

HSi 

IBitWlil vl 

, t ’- nl_J | K 

m 

plllll 

»; ~« : HBHI ■ 

m 




nr 




WORKS BY J.R.R. TOLKIEN 


The Hobbit 
Leaf by Niggle 
On Fairy-Stories 
Farmer Giles of Ham 
The Homecoming of Beorhtnoth 
The Lord of the Rings 
The Adventures of Tom Bombadil 
The Road Goes Ever On (with Donald Swann) 
Smith of Wootton Major 

WORKS PUBLISHED POSTHUMOUSLY 

Sir Gawain and the Green Knight, Pearl and Sir Orfeo 
The Father Christmas Letters 
The Silmarillion 
Pictures by J.R.R. Tolkien 
Unfinished Tales 
The Letters of J.R.R. Tolkien 
Finn and Hengest 
Mr Bliss 

The Monsters and the Critics & Other Essays 
Roverandom 
The Children of Hurin 
The Legend of Sigurd and Gudrun 

THE HISTORY OF MIDDLE-EARTH - BY CHRISTOPHER TOLKIEN 

I The Book of Lost Tales, Part One 

II The Book of Lost Tales, Part Two 

III The Lays of Beleriand 
IV The Shaping of Middle-earth 
V The Lost Road and Other Writings 

VI The Return of the Shadow 

VII The Treason of Isengard 
VIII The War of the Ring 

IX Sauron Defeated 

X Morgoth’s Ring 
XI The War of the Jewels 

XII The Peoples of Middle-earth 



COPYRIGHT 


HarperCollinsPub/z'shers 
77-85 Fulham Palace Road, 
Hammersmith, London w6 8 j B 
www.tolkien.co.uk 

This paperback edition 1999 
46 


First published in Great Britain by 
George Allen & Unwin 1977 
First paperback edition 1979 


Copyright © The J.R.R. Tolkien Copyright Trust and C.R. Tolkien 1977 



and ‘Tolkien’® are registered trademarks of The J.R.R. Tolkien Estate 

Limited 


ISBN 0 261 10273 7 

All rights reserved under International and Pan-American Copyright 
Conventions. By payment of the required fees, you have been granted the non¬ 
exclusive, non-transferable right to access and read the text of this e-book on¬ 
screen. No part of this text may be reproduced, transmitted, down-loaded, 
decompiled, reverse engineered, or stored in or introduced into any information 
storage and retrieval system, in any form or by any means, whether electronic or 
mechanical, now known or hereinafter invented, without the express written 

permission of HarperCollins e-books. 

Mobipocket Reader © April 2009 ISBN: 978-0-06-192763-8 



ml HarperCollins e-books 
ABOUT THE PUBLISHER 


Australia 

HarperCollins Publishers (Australia) Pty. Ltd. 

25 Ryde Road (PO Box 321) 

Pymble, NSW 2073, Australia 
http://www.harpercollinsebooks.com.au 

Canada 

HarperCollins Canada 
2 Bloor Street East - 20th Floor 
Toronto, ON, M4W, 1A8, Canada 
http://www.harpercollinsebooks.ca 

New Zealand 

HarperCollinsPublishers (New Zealand) Limited 
P.O. Box 1 Auckland, 

New Zealand 

http://www.harpercollinsebooks.co.nz 

United Kingdom 

HarperCollins Publishers Ltd. 

77-85 Fulham Palace Road 
London, W6 8JB, UK 
http://www.harpercollinsebooks.co.uk 

United States 

HarperCollins Publishers Inc. 

10 East 53rd Street 

New York, NY 10022 

http://www.harpercollinsebooks.com 



Though I have thought about them a good deal. 


* It is, I suppose, fundamentally concerned with the problem of the relation of 
Art (and Sub-creation) and Primary Reality. 


* Not in the Beginner of Evil: his was a sub-creative Fall, and hence the Elves 
(the representatives of sub-creation par excellence) were peculiarly his enemies, 
and the special object of his desire and hate - and open to his deceits. Their Fall 
is into possessiveness and (to a less degree) into perversion of their art to power. 


* As far as all this has symbolical or allegorical significance, Light is such a 
primeval symbol in the nature of the Universe, that it can hardly be analysed. 
The Light of Valinor (derived from light before any fall) is the light of art 
undivorced from reason, that sees things both scientifically (or philosophically) 
and imaginatively (or sub-creatively) and says that they are good - as beautiful. 
The Light of Sun (or Moon) is derived from the Trees only after they were 
sullied by Evil. 


* Of course in reality this only means that my ‘elves’ are only a representation 
or an apprehension of a part of human nature, but that is not the legendary mode 
of talking. 


* [Some words of the original manuscript were omitted by the typist in this 
sentence.] 


* Elrond symbolises throughout the ancient wisdom, and his House represents 
Lore - the preservation in reverent memory of all tradition concerning the good, 
wise, and beautiful. It is not a scene of action but of reflection. Thus it is a place 
visited on the way to all deeds, or 'adventures’. It may prove to be on the direct 
road (as in The Hobbit ); but it may be necessary to go from there in a totally 
unexpected course. So necessarily in The Lord of the Rings, having escaped to 
Elrond from the imminent pursuit of present evil, the hero departs in a wholly 
new direction: to go and face it at its source. 


* The view is taken (as clearly reappears later in the case of the Hobbits that 
have the Ring for a while) that each ‘Kind’ has a natural span, integral to its 
biological and spiritual nature. This cannot really be increased qualitatively or 
quantitatively; so that prolongation in time is like stretching a wire out ever 
tauter, or ‘spreading butter ever thinner’ it becomes an intolerable torment. 


i [When this letter was written the original history of the rulers of Numenor, 
whereby Tar-Calion (Ar-Pharazon) was the thirteenth and not as afterwards the 
twenty-fifth, was still present.] 


The Silmarillion is an account of the Elder Days, or the First Age of Tolkien’s 
World. It is the ancient drama to which the characters in The Lord of the Rings 
look back, and in whose events some of them, such as Elrond and Galadriel, 
took part. The tales of The Silmarillion are set in an age when Morgoth, the first 
Dark Lord, dwelt in Middle-earth, and the High Elves made war upon him for 
the recovery of the Silmarils. 

The three Silmarils were jewels created by Feanor, most gifted of the Elves. 
Within them were imprisoned the Light of the Two Trees of Valinor before the 
Trees themselves were destroyed by Morgoth. Thereafter the unsullied Light of 
Valinor lived on only in the Silmarils; but they were seized by Morgoth and set 
in his crown, guarded in the fortress of Angband in the north of Middle-earth. 

The Silmarillion is the history of the rebellion of Feanor and his kindred 
against the gods, their exile from Valinor and return to Middle-earth and their 
war, hopeless despite their heroism, against the great Enemy. Included in the 
book are several shorter works. The Ainulindale is a myth of the Creation and in 
the Valaquenta the nature and powers of each of the gods is described. The 
Akallabeth recounts the downfall of the great island kingdom of Numenor at the 
end of the Second Age and Of the Rings of Power tells of the great events at the 
end of the Third Age, which are narrated in The Lord of the Rings. 



Table of Contents 


J.R.R. TOLKIEN 

TITLE PAGE 

FOREWORD 

PREFACE TO THE SECOND EDITION 

FROM A LETTER BY J.R.R. TOLKIEN TO MILTON WALDMAN. 1951 

AINUL INDALE 

VALAOUENTA 

OUENTA SILMARILLION 

CHAPTER 1: OF THE BEGINNING OF DAYS 

CHAPTER 2: OF AULE AND YAVANNA 

CHAPTER 3: OF THE COMING OF THE ELVES AND THE CAPTIVITY OF 

MELKOR 

CHAPTER 4: OF THINGOL AND MELIAN 

CHAPTER 5: OF ELDAMAR AND THE PRINCES OF THE ELDALIE 

CHAPTER 6: OF FEANOR AND THE UNCHAINING OF MELKOR 

CHAPTER 7: OF THE SILMARILS AND THE UNREST OF THE NOLDOR 

CHAPTER 8: OF THE DARKENING OF VALINOR 

CHAPTER 9: OF THE FLIGHT OF THE NOLDOR 

CHAPTER 10: OF THE SINDAR 

CHAPTER 11: OF THE SUN AND MOON AND THE HIDING OF VALINOR 

CHAPTER 12: OF MEN 

CHAPTER 13: OF THE RETURN OF THE NOLDOR 

CHAPTER 14: OF BELERIAND AND ITS REALMS 

CHAPTER 15: OF THE NOLDOR IN BELERIAND 

CHAPTER 16: OF MAEGLIN 

CHAPTER 17: OF THE COMING OF MEN INTO THE WEST 

CHAPTER 18: OF THE RUIN OF BELERIAND AND THE FALL OF 

FINGOLFIN 

CHAPTER 19: OF BEREN AND LUTHIEN 

CHAPTER 20: OF THE FIFTH BATTLE: NIRNAETH ARNOEDIAD 

CHAPTER 21: OF TURIN TURAMBAR 

CHAPTER 22: OF THE RUIN OF DORIATH 

CHAPTER 23: OF TUOR AND THE FALL OF GONDOLIN 

CHAPTER 24: OF THE VOYAGE OF EARENDIL AND THE WAR OF 


WRATH 





































AKALLABETH 

OF THE RINGS OF POWER AND THE THIRD AGE 

NOTE ON PRONUNCIATION 

INDEX OF NAMES 

APPENDIX 

MAPS 

WORKS BY J.R.R. TOLKIEN 

COPYRIGHT PAGE 
ABOUT THE PUBLISHER 

THE FELLOWSHIP 
OF THE RING 


BEING THE FIRST PART OF 
THE LORD OF THE RINGS 


BY 
i:K.R, TOLKIEN 


= HarperCollins e-books 


Three Rings for the Elven-kings under the sky, 
Seven for the Dwarf-lords in their halls of stone, 
Nine for Mortal Men doomed to die, 
One for the Dark Lord on his dark throne 
In the Land of Mordor where the Shadows le. 
One Ring to rule them all, One Ring to find them, 
One Ring to bring them all and in the darkness bind them 


In the Land of Mordor where the Shadows lie. 


CONTENTS 


Note on the Text ix 
Note on the soth Anniversary Edition xviii 
Foreword to the Second Edition XXiii 
Prologue Concerning Hobbits, and other 
matters I 
BOOK ONE 
I A Long-expected Party 29 
II The Shadow of the Past 55 
II Three is Company 85 
IV_ A Short Cut to Mushrooms 112 
V_ A Conspiracy Unmasked 128 
VI The Old Forest 143 
VII In the House of Tom Bombadil 161 
VII Fog on the Barrow-downs 176 
IX At the Sign of The Prancing Pony 195 
X Strider 213 
XI A Knife in the Dark 230 
XII “Flight to the Ford 257 
BOOK TWO 
I Many Meetings 285 
II The Council of Elrond 311 


II The Ring Goes South 354 


viii 


CONTENTS 


A Journey in the Dark 

The Bridge of Khazad-dim 
Lothlérien 

The Mirror of Galadriel 
Farewell to Lorien 

The Great River 

The Breaking of the Fellowship 


Maps 

Works By J.R.R. Tolkien 
Copyright 

About The Publisher 


384 
418 
433 
459 
478 
495 
515 
533 
540 
541 
542 


NOTE ON THE TEXT 


J.R.R. Tolkien’s The Lord of the Rings is often erroneously 
called a trilogy, when it is in fact a single novel, consisting 
of six books plus appendices, sometimes published in three 
volumes. 

The first volume, The Fellowship of the Ring, was published 
in Great Britain by the London firm George Allen & Unwin 
on 29 July 1954; an American edition followed on 21 October 
of the same year, published by Houghton Mifflin Company 
of Boston. In the production of this first volume, Tolkien 
experienced what became for him a continual problem: 
printer’s errors and compositor’s mistakes, including well- 
intentioned ‘corrections’ of his sometimes idiosyncratic 
usage. These ‘corrections’ include the altering of dwarves to 
dwarfs, elvish to elfish, further to farther, nasturtians to nastur- 
tiums, try and say to try to say and (‘worst of all’ to Tolkien) 
elven to elfin. In a work such as The Lord of the Rings, 
containing invented languages and delicately constructed 
nomenclatures, errors and inconsistencies impede both the 
understanding and the appreciation of serious readers — and 
Tolkien had many such readers from very early on. Even 
before the publication of the third volume, which contained 
much hitherto unrevealed information on the invented lan- 
guages and writing systems, Tolkien received many letters 
from readers written in these systems, in addition to numer- 
ous enquiries on the finer points of their usage. 

The second volume, The Two Towers, was published in 
England on 11 November 1954 and in the United States on 
21 April 1955. Meanwhile Tolkien worked to keep a promise 
he had made in the foreword to volume one: that ‘an index 
of names and strange words’ would appear in the third vol- 
ume. As originally planned, this index would contain much 
etymological information on the languages, particularly on 
the elven tongues, with a large vocabulary. It proved the chief 


Xi NOTE ON THE TEXT 


cause of the delay in publishing volume three, which in the 
end contained no index at all, only an apology from the 
publisher for its absence. For Tolkien had abandoned work 
on it after indexing volumes one and two, believing its size 
and therefore its cost to be ruinous. 

Volume three, The Return of the King, finally appeared in 
England on 20 October 1955 and in the United States on 
5 January 1956. With the appearance of the third volume, 
The Lord of the Rings was published in its entirety, and its 
first edition text remained virtually unchanged for a decade. 
Tolkien had made a few small corrections, but further errors 
entered The Fellowship of the Ring in its December 1954 
second impression when the printer, having distributed the 
type after the first printing, reset the book without informing 
the author or publisher. These include misrepresentations of 
the original printed text — that is, words and phrases that 
read acceptably in context, but which depart from Tolkien’s 
wording as originally written and published. 

In 1965, stemming from what then appeared to be copy- 
right problems in the United States, an American paperback 
firm published an unauthorized and non-royalty-paying edi- 
tion of The Lord of the Rings. For this new edition by Ace 
Books the text of the narrative was reset, thus introducing 
new typographical errors; the appendices, however, were 
reproduced photographically from the hardcover edition, and 
remain consistent with it. 

Tolkien set to work on his first revision of the text so that 
a newly revised and authorized edition could successfully 
compete on the American market. This first revision of the 
text was published in America in paperback by Ballantine 
Books, under licence from Houghton Mifflin, in October 
1965. In addition to revisions within the text itself, Tolkien 
replaced his original foreword with a new one. He was pleased 
to remove the original foreword; in his check copy, he 
wrote of it: ‘confusing (as it does) real personal matters with 
the “‘machinery” of the Tale, is a serious mistake’. Tolkien 
also added an extension to the prologue and an index — not 


NOTE ON THE TEXT Xiil 


the detailed index of names promised in the first edition, 
but, rather, a bald index with only names and page refer- 
ences. Additionally, at this time the appendices were greatly 
revised. 

Tolkien received his copies of the Ballantine edition in late 
January 1966, and in early February he recorded in his diary 
that he had ‘worked for some hours on the Appendices in 
Ballantine version & found more errors than I at first 
expected’. Soon after this he sent a small number of further 
revisions to Ballantine for the appendices, including the now 
well-known addition of ‘Estella Bolger’ as wife of Meriadoc 
in the family trees in Appendix C. Most of these revisions, 
which entered variously in the third and fourth impressions 
(June and August 1966) of volume three, and which were 
not always inserted correctly (thereby causing further con- 
fusion in the text), somehow never made it into the main 
sequence of revision in the three-volume British hardcover 
edition, and for long remained anomalies. Tolkien once 
wrote, concerning the revising of The Lord of the Rings, that 
perhaps he had failed to keep his notes in order; this errant 
branch of revision seems likely to be an example of that 
disorder — either in his notes or in the ability of his publishers 
to follow them with utmost accuracy. 

The revised text first appeared in Great Britain in a three- 
volume hardcover ‘Second Edition’ from Allen & Unwin on 
27 October 1966. But again there were problems. Although 
the revisions Tolkien sent to America of the text itself were 
available to be utilized in the new British edition, his extensive 
revisions to the appendices were lost after being entered into 
the Ballantine edition. Allen & Unwin were forced to reset the 
appendices using the copy as published in the first Ballantine 
edition. This did not include Tolkien’s second, small set of 
revisions sent to Ballantine; but, more significantly, it did 
include a great number of errors and omissions, many of 
which were not discovered until long afterwards. Thus, in 
the appendices, a close scrutiny of the first edition text and 
of the much later corrected impressions of the second edition 


XIV NOTE ON THE TEXT 


is necessary to discern whether any particular change in this 
edition is authorial or erroneous. 

In America, the revised text appeared in hardcover in the 
three-volume edition published by Houghton Mifflin on 
27 February 1967. This text was evidently photo-offset from 
the 1966 Allen & Unwin three-volume hardcover, and is thus 
consistent with it. Aside from the first printing of this second 
Houghton Mifflin edition, which has a 1967 date on the title 
page, none of the many reprintings is dated. After the initial 
printings of this edition, which bore a 1966 copyright notice, 
the date of copyright was changed in 1965 to match the 
statement in the Ballantine edition. This change has caused 
a great deal of confusion for librarians and other researchers 
who have tried to sort out the sequence of publication of 
these editions. 

Meanwhile, Tolkien spent much of the summer of 1966 
further revising the text. In June he learned that any more 
revisions were too late for inclusion in the 1966 Allen & 
Unwin second edition, and he recorded in his diary: “But I 
am attempting to complete my work [on the revisions] — I 
cannot leave it while it is all in my mind. So much time has 
been wasted in all my work by this constant breaking of 
threads.’ This was the last major set of revisions Tolkien 
himself made to the text during his lifetime. They were added 
to the second impression (1967) of the three-volume hard- 
cover Allen & Unwin second edition. The revisions them- 
selves mostly include corrections of nomenclature and 
attempts at consistency of usage throughout the three vol- 
umes. Some small alterations were made by Tolkien in the 
1969 one-volume India paper edition. 

J.R.R. Tolkien died in 1973. His third son and literary 
executor, Christopher Tolkien, sent a large number of further 
corrections of misprints, mainly in the appendices and index, 
to Allen & Unwin for use in their editions in 1974. Most of 
these corrections were typographical, and in line with his 
father’s expressed intent in his own check copies. 

Since 1974, Christopher Tolkien has sent additional cor- 


NOTE ON THE TEXT XV 


rections, as errors have been discovered, to the British pub- 
lishers of The Lord of the Rings (Allen & Unwin, later Unwin 
Hyman, and now HarperCollins), who have tried to be con- 
scientious in the impossible task of maintaining a textual 
integrity in whichever editions of The Lord of the Rings they 
have published. However, every time the text has been reset 
for publication in a new format (e.g. the various paperback 
editions published in England in the 1970s and 1980s), huge 
numbers of new misprints have crept in, though at times 
some of these errors have been observed and corrected in 
later printings. Still, throughout these years the three-volume 
British hardcover edition has retained the highest textual 
integrity. 

In the United States, the text of the Ballantine paperback 
has remained unchanged for more than three decades after 
Tolkien added his few revisions in 1966. The text in all of 
the Houghton Mifflin editions remained unchanged from 
1967 until 1987, when Houghton Mifflin photo-offset the 
then current three-volume British hardcover edition in order 
to update the text used in their editions. In those new 
reprintings a number of further corrections (overseen by 
Christopher Tolkien) were added, and the errant Ballantine 
branch of revision (including the ‘Estella Bolger’ addition) 
was integrated into the main branch of textual descent. This 
method of correction involved a cut-and-paste process with 
printed versions of the text. Beginning with the 1987 Hough- 
ton Mifflin edition, an earlier version of this ‘Note on the 
Text? (dated October 1986) was added to The Lord of the 
Rings. This ‘Note’ has been reworked three times since then 
— the version dated April 1993 first appeared in 1994, and 
the version dated April 2002 came out later that year. The 
present ‘Note’ replaces and supersedes all previous versions. 

For the 1994 British edition published by HarperCollins, 
the text of The Lord of the Rings was entered into word- 
processing files. This next stage of textual evolution came 
about to allow for a greater uniformity of the text in all future 
editions, but with it, inevitably, came new wrinkles. Some 


Xv1 NOTE ON THE TEXT 


new misreadings entered into the text, while at the same time 
others were fixed. In the worst instance, one line of the ring 
inscription in the chapter “The Shadow of the Past’ of The 
Fellowship of the Ring was simply dropped. Unforeseeable 
glitches arose in other editions when the base computerized 
text was transferred into page-making or typesetting pro- 
grams — e.g., in one edition of The Fellowship of the Ring, the 
closing two sentences of “The Council of Elrond’ simply and 
inexplicably disappeared. Such glitches have been very much 
the exception, not the rule, and the text has otherwise main- 
tained a consistency and integrity throughout its com- 
puterized evolution. 

The 1994 edition also contained a number of new correc- 
tions (again supervised by Christopher Tolkien), as well as a 
reconfigured index of names and page references. The 1994 
text was first used in American editions published by Hough- 
ton Mifflin in 1999. A small number of further corrections 
were added into the 2002 three-volume edition illustrated by 
Alan Lee, published by HarperCollins in Great Britain and 
Houghton Mifflin in the United States. 


The textual history of The Lord of the Rings, merely in its 
published form, is a vast and complex web. In this brief 
note I have given only a glimpse of the overall sequence and 
structure. Further details on the revisions and corrections 
made over the years to the published text of The Lord of the 
Rings, and a fuller account of its publishing history, may be 
found in 7.R.R. Tolkien: A Descriptive Bibliography, by Wayne 
G. Hammond, with the assistance of Douglas A. Anderson 
(1993). 

For those interested in observing the gradual evolving of 
The Lord of the Rings from its earliest drafts to its published 
form, I highly recommend Christopher Tolkien’s account, 
which appears within five volumes of his twelve-volume series 
The History of Middle-earth. Volumes six through nine con- 
tain the major part of his study pertaining to The Lord of the 
Rings: The Return of the Shadow (1988); The Treason of 


NOTE ON THE TEXT XVil 


Isengard (1989); The War of the Ring (1990); and Sauron 
Defeated (1992). Also, the final book of the series, The Peoples 
of Middle-earth (1996), covers the evolution of the prologue 
and appendices to The Lord of the Rings. These volumes 
contain an engrossing over-the-shoulder account of the 
growth and writing of Tolkien’s masterpiece. 

The process of studying Tolkien’s manuscripts of The Lord 
of the Rings involved the deciphering of versions where 
Tolkien wrote first in pencil and then in ink atop the pencilled 
draft. Christopher Tolkien has decribed his father’s method 
of composition in The Return of the Shadow: ‘In the handwrit- 
ing that he used for rapid drafts and sketches, not intended 
to endure long before he turned to them again and gave them 
a more workable form, letters are so loosely formed that a 
word which cannot be deduced or guessed at from the con- 
text or from later versions can prove perfectly opaque after 
long examination; and if, as he often did, he used a soft pencil 
much has now become blurred and faint.’ The true difficulty 
of reading such double-drafts can be observed in the frontis- 
piece to The War of the Ring, which reproduces in colour 
Tolkien’s illustration of ‘Shelob’s Lair’ from a page of 
Tolkien’s manuscript. Looking very closely at the hasty ink 
draft alongside the illustration, one can see underneath it the 
earlier, hastier, pencilled draft. Also in The War of the Ring, 
Christopher Tolkien reproduces a page from the first manu- 
script of the chapter “The Taming of Sméagol’, and the 
printed text corresponding to this text is on the facing page 
(see pp. 90-91). One is astonished at anyone’s ability to 
decipher such texts. 

That difficulty aside, just what do these books signify to 
ordinary readers and to Tolkien scholars? And what is ‘the 
history of the writing’ of a book? Simply, these volumes show 
in great detail the development of the story of The Lord of 
the Rings from its very earliest drafts and hasty projections 
through its completion. We see in the earliest materials what 
is very much a children’s book, a sequel to The Hobbit, and 
as the story grows through various ‘phases’, there is an 


XVili NOTE ON THE TEXT 


increase in seriousness and depth. We see alternate branches 
of development, the gradual blending and merging of certain 
characters, and the slow emergence of the nature of the rings 
and of the motivations of other characters. Some of these 
various ideas are abandoned altogether, while others are 
reworked into some variant form that may or may not survive 
into the final version. 

One could make a whole catalogue of interesting tidbits 
from Christopher Tolkien’s study — such as the fact that 
Strider was called Trotter until a very late stage in the writing 
of the book; that Trotter was at one time a hobbit, so named 
because he wore wooden shoes; that Tolkien at one point 
considered a romance between Aragorn and Eowyn; that 
Tolkien wrote an epilogue to the book, tying up loose ends, 
but it was dropped before publication (and now appears in 
Sauron Defeated); and so on. But these developments are best 
appreciated when read within the context of Christopher 
Tolkien’s commentary rather than discussed separately. 

The most significant achievement of these volumes is that 
they show us how Tolkien wrote and thought. Nowhere else 
do we see the authorial process itself at work in such detail. 
Tolkien’s hastiest comments about where the story might 
proceed, or why it can or can’t go such and such a way — 
these queries to himself were written out: Tolkien is literally 
thinking on paper. This gives an added dimension of under- 
standing to Tolkien’s comment to Stanley Unwin in a 1963 
letter that, when suffering from trouble with his shoulder and 
right arm, ‘I found not being able to use a pen or pencil as 
defeating as the loss of her beak would be to a hen.’ And we, 
as readers of these volumes, can share with Tolkien himself 
the wonder and bewilderment of new characters appearing 
as if from nowhere, or of some other sudden change or devel- 
opment, at the very moment of their emergence into the 
story. 

I know of no other instance in literature where we have 
such a ‘history of the writing’ of a book, told mostly by the 
author himself, with all the hesitations and false paths laid 


NOTE ON THE TEXT XIX 


out before us, sorted out, commented upon, and served up 
to a reader like a feast. We are shown innumerable instances 
in the minutest detail of the thought-process itself at work. 
We see the author fully absorbed in creation for its own sake. 
And this is all the more exceptional because this is a history 
not only of the unfolding of a story and its text, but of the 
evolution of a world. There is an additional wealth of material 
beyond simple narrative text. There are maps and illustra- 
tions. There are languages and writing systems, and the his- 
tories of the peoples who spoke and wrote in these systems. 
All of these additional materials add multiple dimensions of 
complexity to our appreciation of the invented world itself. 

Fifty years into the published life of The Lord of the Rings, 
it seems extraordinary to me that we have not only such a 
masterful work of literature but also as a companion to it an 
unparalleled account of its writing. Our gratitude as readers 
goes to both of the Tolkiens, father and son. 


Douglas A. Anderson 
May 2004 


NOTE ON THE 50T? ANNIVERSARY 
EDITION 


In this edition of The Lord of the Rings, prepared for the 
fiftieth anniversary of its publication, between three and four 
hundred emendations have been made following an exhaus- 
tive review of past editions and printings. The present text 
is based on the setting of the HarperCollins three-volume 
hardcover edition of 2002, which in turn was a revision of the 
HarperCollins reset edition of 1994. As Douglas A. Anderson 
comments in the preceding ‘Note on the Text’, each of those 
editions was itself corrected, and each also introduced new 
errors. At the same time, other errors survived undetected, 
among them some five dozen which entered as long ago as 
1954, in the resetting of The Fellowship of the Ring published 
as its ‘second impression’. 

That the printer had quietly reset The Fellowship of the 
Ring, and that copies had been issued without proof having 
been read by the author, never became known to Tolkien; 
while his publisher, Rayner Unwin, learned of it only thirty- 
eight years after the fact. Tolkien found a few of the unautho- 
rized changes introduced in the second printing when 
(probably while preparing the second edition in 1965) he 
read a copy of the twelfth impression (1962), but thought 
the errors newly made. These, among others, were corrected 
in the course of the reprinting. Then in 1992 Eric Thompson, 
a reader with a keen eye for typographic detail, noticed small 
differences between the first and second impressions of The 
Fellowship of the Ring and called them to the attention of the 
present editors. About one-sixth of the errors that entered in 
the second printing quickly came to light. Many more were 
revealed only recently, when Steven M. Frisby used ingenious 
optical aids to make a comparison of copies of The Lord of 
the Rings in greater detail than was previously accomplished. 


NOTE ON THE 507 ANNIVERSARY EDITION XXi 


We have gladly made full use of Mr Frisby’s results, which 
he has generously shared and discussed. 

In the course of its fifty-year history The Lord of the Rings 
has had many such readers who have recorded changes made 
between its various appearances in print, both to document 
what has gone before and to aid in the achievement of an 
authoritative text. Errors or possible errors were reported to 
the author himself or to his publishers, and information on 
the textual history of the work circulated among Tolkien 
enthusiasts at least as early as 1966, when Banks Mebane 
published his ‘Prolegomena to a Variorum Tolkien’ in the 
fanzine Entmoot. Most notably in later years, Douglas A. 
Anderson has been in the forefront of efforts to achieve an 
accurate text of The Lord of the Rings (and of The Hobbit); 
Christina Scull has published ‘A Preliminary Study of Vari- 
ations in Editions of The Lord of the Rings’ in Beyond Bree 
(April and August 1985); Wayne G. Hammond has compiled 
extensive lists of textual changes in F.R.R. Tolkien: A Descrip- 
tive Bibliography (1993); and David Bratman has published 
an important article, ‘A Corrigenda to The Lord of the Rings’, 
in the March 1994 number of The Tolkien Collector. The 
observations of Dainis Bisenieks, Yuval Welis, Charles Noad, 
and other readers, sent to us directly or posted in public 
forums, have also been of service. 

Efforts such as these follow the example of the author of 
The Lord of the Rings during his lifetime. His concern for the 
textual accuracy and coherence of his work is evident from 
the many emendations he made in later printings, and from 
notes he made for other emendations which for one reason 
or another have not previously (or have only partly) been put 
into effect. Even late in life, when such labours wearied him, 
his feelings were clear. On 30 October 1967 he wrote to Joy 
Hill at George Allen & Unwin, concerning a reader’s query 
he had received about points in the Appendices to The Lord 
of the Rings: ‘Personally I have ceased to bother about these 
minor ‘‘discrepancies’’, since if the genealogies and calendars 
etc. lack verisimilitude it is in their general excessive accuracy: 


XXii NOTE ON THE 50T ANNIVERSARY EDITION 


as compared with real annals or genealogies! Anyway the 
slips were few, have now mostly been removed, and the dis- 
covery of what remain seems an amusing pastime! But errors 
in the text are another matter (italics ours). In fact Tolkien 
had not ‘ceased to bother’, and ‘slips’ were dealt with as 
opportunities arose. These, and the indulgence of his pub- 
lisher, allowed Tolkien a luxury few authors enjoy: multiple 
chances not only to correct his text but to improve it, and to 
further develop the languages, geography, and peoples of 
Middle-earth. 

The fiftieth anniversary of The Lord of the Rings seemed an 
ideal opportunity to consider the latest (2002) text in light of 
information we had gathered in the course of decades of work 
in Tolkien studies, with Steve Frisby’s research at hand, and 
with an electronic copy of The Lord of the Rings (supplied by 
HarperCollins) searchable by keyword or phrase. The latter 
especially allowed us to develop lists of words that varied 
from one instance to another, and investigate variations in 
usage, as they stood in the copy-text and relative to earlier 
editions and printings. Of course Tolkien wrote The Lord of 
the Rings over so long a period of time, some eighteen years, 
that inconsistencies in its text were almost inevitable. Chris- 
topher Tolkien even observed to us that some apparent 
inconsistencies of form in his father’s work may even have 
been deliberate: for instance, although Tolkien carefully dis- 
tinguished house ‘dwelling’ from House ‘noble family or dyn- 
asty’, in two instances he used house in the latter sense but 
in lower case, perhaps because a capital letter would have 
detracted from the importance of the adjective with which 
the word was paired (‘royal house’, ‘golden house’). There 
can be no doubt, however, that Tolkien attempted to correct 
inconsistency, no less than outright error, whenever it came 
to his attention, and it was our opinion, with the advice and 
agreement of Christopher Tolkien, that an attempt should be 
made to do so in the anniversary edition, in so far as we could 
carefully and conservatively distinguish what to emend. 

Many of the emendations in the present text are to marks 


NOTE ON THE 507 ANNIVERSARY EDITION  XxXiil 


of punctuation, either to correct recent typographical errors 
or to repair surviving alterations introduced in the second 
printing of The Fellowship of the Ring. In the latter respect 
and in every case, Tolkien’s original punctuation is always 
more felicitous — subtle points, when one is comparing com- 
mas and semi-colons, but no less a part of the author’s 
intended expression. Distinctive words such as chill rather 
than cold, and glistered rather than glistened, changed by type- 
setters long ago without authorization, likewise have been 
restored. A controlled amount of regularization also seemed 
called for, such as naught rather than nought, a change insti- 
tuted by Tolkien but not carried through in all instances; 
Dark Power rather than dark power when the reference is 
obviously to Sauron (or Morgoth); Barrow-downs by Tolkien’s 
preference rather than Barrowdowns; likewise Bree-hill rather 
than Bree Hill; accented and more common Driiadan rather 
than Druadan; capitalized names of seasons when used as 
personification or metaphor, according to Tolkien’s predomi- 
nant practice and the internal logic of the text; and Elvish 
rather than e/vish when used as a separate adjective, following 
a preference Tolkien marked in his copy of the second edition 
of The Lord of the Rings. In addition, we have added a second 
accent to Nuimenérean(s), as Tolkien often wrote the name in 
manuscript and as it appears in The Silmarilion and other 
posthumous publications. 

The result, nonetheless, still includes many variations in 
capitalization, punctuation, and other points of style. Not all 
of these are erroneous: they include words such as Sun, Moon, 
Hobbit, and Man (or sun, moon, hobbit, man), which may 
change form according to meaning or application, in relation 
to adjacent adjectives, or whether Tolkien intended personi- 
fication, poetry, or emphasis. His intent cannot be divined 
with confidence in every case. But it is possible to discern 
Tolkien’s preferences in many instances, from statements he 
wrote in his check copies of The Lord of the Rings or from a 
close analysis of its text in manuscript, typescript, proof, and 
print. Whenever there has been any doubt whatsoever as to 


XXIV NOTE ON THE 507 ANNIVERSARY EDITION 


the author’s intentions, the text has been allowed to stand. 

Most of the demonstrable errors noted by Christopher 
Tolkien in The History of Middle-earth also have been cor- 
rected, such as the distance from the Brandywine Bridge to 
the Ferry (ten miles rather than twenty) and the number of 
Merry’s ponies (five rather than six), shadows of earlier 
drafts. But those inconsistencies of content, such as Gimli’s 
famous (and erroneous) statement in Book III, Chapter 7, 
“Till now I have hewn naught but wood since I left Moria’, 
which would require rewriting to emend rather than simple 
correction, remain unchanged. 

So many new emendations to The Lord of the Rings, and 
such an extensive review of its text, deserve to be fully docu- 
mented. Although most readers will be content with the text 
alone, many will want to know more about the problems 
encountered in preparing this new edition, and their solutions 
(where solutions have been possible), especially where the 
text has been emended, but also where it has not. To this 
end, and to illuminate the work in other respects, we are 
preparing a volume of annotations to The Lord of the Rings 
for publication in 2005. This will allow us to discuss, at a 
length impossible in a prefatory note, the various textual 
cruces of The Lord of the Rings, to identify changes that have 
been made to the present text, and to remark on significant 
alterations to the published work throughout its history. We 
will also explain archaic or unusual words and names in The 
Lord of the Rings, explore literary and historical influences, 
note connections with Tolkien’s other writings, and comment 
on differences between its drafts and published form, on 
questions of language, and on much else that we hope will 
interest readers and enhance their enjoyment of Tolkien’s 
masterpiece. 


Wayne G. Hammond & Christina Scull 
May 2004 


FOREWORD TO THE SECOND EDITION 


This tale grew in the telling, until it became a history of the 
Great War of the Ring and included many glimpses of the 
yet more ancient history that preceded it. It was begun soon 
after The Hobbit was written and before its publication in 
1937; but I did not go on with this sequel, for I wished first 
to complete and set in order the mythology and legends of 
the Elder Days, which had then been taking shape for some 
years. I desired to do this for my own satisfaction, and I had 
little hope that other people would be interested in this work, 
especially since it was primarily linguistic in inspiration and 
was begun in order to provide the necessary background of 
‘history’ for Elvish tongues. 

When those whose advice and opinion I sought corrected 
little hope to no hope, I went back to the sequel, encouraged 
by requests from readers for more information concerning 
hobbits and their adventures. But the story was drawn irre- 
sistibly towards the older world, and became an account, as 
it were, of its end and passing away before its beginning and 
middle had been told. The process had begun in the writing 
of The Hobbit, in which there were already some references 
to the older matter: Elrond, Gondolin, the High-elves, and 
the orcs, as well as glimpses that had arisen unbidden of 
things higher or deeper or darker than its surface: Durin, 
Moria, Gandalf, the Necromancer, the Ring. The discovery 
of the significance of these glimpses and of their relation to 
the ancient histories revealed the Third Age and its culmi- 
nation in the War of the Ring. 

Those who had asked for more information about hobbits 
eventually got it, but they had to wait a long time; for the 
composition of The Lord of the Rings went on at intervals 
during the years 1936 to 1949, a period in which I had many 
duties that I did not neglect, and many other interests as a 
learner and teacher that often absorbed me. The delay was, 


XXV1 FOREWORD TO THE SECOND EDITION 


of course, also increased by the outbreak of war in 1939, by 
the end of which year the tale had not yet reached the end of 
Book One. In spite of the darkness of the next five years I 
found that the story could not now be wholly abandoned, 
and I plodded on, mostly by night, till I stood by Balin’s tomb 
in Moria. There I halted for a long while. It was almost a 
year later when I went on and so came to Lothlorien and the 
Great River late in 1941. In the next year I wrote the first 
drafts of the matter that now stands as Book Three, and the 
beginnings of chapters I and HI of Book Five; and there as 
the beacons flared in Anorien and Théoden came to Harrow- 
dale I stopped. Foresight had failed and there was no time 
for thought. 

It was during 1944 that, leaving the loose ends and perplex- 
ities of a war which it was my task to conduct, or at least to 
report, I forced myself to tackle the journey of Frodo to 
Mordor. These chapters, eventually to become Book Four, 
were written and sent out as a serial to my son, Christopher, 
then in South Africa with the RAF. Nonetheless it took 
another five years before the tale was brought to its present 
end; in that time I changed my house, my chair, and my 
college, and the days though less dark were no less laborious. 
Then when the ‘end’ had at last been reached the whole story 
had to be revised, and indeed largely re-written backwards. 
And it had to be typed, and re-typed: by me; the cost of 
professional typing by the ten-fingered was beyond my 
means. 

The Lord of the Rings has been read by many people since 
it finally appeared in print; and I should like to say something 
here with reference to the many opinions or guesses that I 
have received or have read concerning the motives and mean- 
ing of the tale. The prime motive was the desire of a tale-teller 
to try his hand at a really long story that would hold the 
attention of readers, amuse them, delight them, and at times 
maybe excite them or deeply move them. As a guide I had 
only my own feelings for what is appealing or moving, and 
for many the guide was inevitably often at fault. Some who 


FOREWORD TO THE SECOND EDITION XXVil 


have read the book, or at any rate have reviewed it, have 
found it boring, absurd, or contemptible; and I have no cause 
to complain, since I have similar opinions of their works, or 
of the kinds of writing that they evidently prefer. But even 
from the points of view of many who have enjoyed my story 
there is much that fails to please. It is perhaps not possible 
in a long tale to please everybody at all points, nor to displease 
everybody at the same points; for I find from the letters that 
I have received that the passages or chapters that are to some 
a blemish are all by others specially approved. The most 
critical reader of all, myself, now finds many defects, minor 
and major, but being fortunately under no obligation either 
to review the book or to write it again, he will pass over these 
in silence, except one that has been noted by others: the book 
is too short. 

As for any inner meaning or ‘message’, it has in the inten- 
tion of the author none. It is neither allegorical nor topical. 
As the story grew it put down roots (into the past) and threw 
out unexpected branches: but its main theme was settled 
from the outset by the inevitable choice of the Ring as the 
link between it and The Hobbit. The crucial chapter, “The 
Shadow of the Past’, is one of the oldest parts of the tale. It 
was written long before the foreshadow of 1939 had yet 
become a threat of inevitable disaster, and from that point 
the story would have developed along essentially the same 
lines, if that disaster had been averted. Its sources are things 
long before in mind, or in some cases already written, and 
little or nothing in it was modified by the war that began in 
1939 or its sequels. 

The real war does not resemble the legendary war in its 
process or its conclusion. If it had inspired or directed the 
development of the legend, then certainly the Ring would 
have been seized and used against Sauron; he would not have 
been annihilated but enslaved, and Barad-dir would not have 
been destroyed but occupied. Saruman, failing to get pos- 
session of the Ring, would in the confusion and treacheries 
of the time have found in Mordor the missing links in his 


XXVIli FOREWORD TO THE SECOND EDITION 


own researches into Ring-lore, and before long he would 
have made a Great Ring of his own with which to challenge 
the self-styled Ruler of Middle-earth. In that conflict both 
sides would have held hobbits in hatred and contempt: they 
would not long have survived even as slaves. 

Other arrangements could be devised according to the 
tastes or views of those who like allegory or topical reference. 
But I cordially dislike allegory in all its manifestations, and 
always have done so since I grew old and wary enough to 
detect its presence. I much prefer history, true or feigned, 
with its varied applicability to the thought and experience of 
readers. I think that many confuse ‘applicability’ with ‘alle- 
gory’; but the one resides in the freedom of the reader, and 
the other in the purposed domination of the author. 

An author cannot of course remain wholly unaffected by 
his experience, but the ways in which a story-germ uses the 
soil of experience are extremely complex, and attempts to 
define the process are at best guesses from evidence that is 
inadequate and ambiguous. It is also false, though naturally 
attractive, when the lives of an author and critic have over- 
lapped, to suppose that the movements of thought or the 
events of times common to both were necessarily the most 
powerful influences. One has indeed personally to come 
under the shadow of war to feel fully its oppression; but as 
the years go by it seems now often forgotten that to be caught 
in youth by 1914 was no less hideous an experience than to 
be involved in 1939 and the following years. By 1918 all but 
one of my close friends were dead. Or to take a less grievous 
matter: it has been supposed by some that “The Scouring of 
the Shire’ reflects the situation in England at the time when 
I was finishing my tale. It does not. It is an essential part of 
the plot, foreseen from the outset, though in the event modi- 
fied by the character of Saruman as developed in the story 
without, need I say, any allegorical significance or contem- 
porary political reference whatsoever. It has indeed some 
basis in experience, though slender (for the economic situ- 
ation was entirely different), and much further back. The 


FOREWORD TO THE SECOND EDITION XXIX 


country in which I lived in childhood was being shabbily 
destroyed before I was ten, in days when motor-cars were 
rare objects (I had never seen one) and men were still building 
suburban railways. Recently I saw in a paper a picture of the 
last decrepitude of the once thriving corn-mill beside its pool 
that long ago seemed to me so important. I never liked the 
looks of the Young miller, but his father, the Old miller, had 
a black beard, and he was not named Sandyman. 

The Lord of the Rings is now issued in a new edition, and 
the opportunity has been taken of revising it. A number of 
errors and inconsistencies that still remained in the text have 
been corrected, and an attempt has been made to provide 
information on a few points which attentive readers have 
raised. I have considered all their comments and enquiries, 
and if some seem to have been passed over that may be 
because I have failed to keep my notes in order; but many 
enquiries could only be answered by additional appendices, 
or indeed by the production of an accessory volume contain- 
ing much of the material that I did not include in the original 
edition, in particular more detailed linguistic information. In 
the meantime this edition offers this Foreword, an addition 
to the Prologue, some notes, and an index of the names of 
persons and places. This index is in intention complete in 
items but not in references, since for the present purpose it 
has been necessary to reduce its bulk. A complete index, 
making full use of the material prepared for me by Mrs. N. 
Smith, belongs rather to the accessory volume. 


PROLOGUE 


I 
Concerning Hobbits 


This book is largely concerned with Hobbits, and from its 
pages a reader may discover much of their character and a 
little of their history. Further information will also be found 
in the selection from the Red Book of Westmarch that has 
already been published, under the title of The Hobbit. That 
story was derived from the earlier chapters of the Red Book, 
composed by Bilbo himself, the first Hobbit to become 
famous in the world at large, and called by him There and 
Back Again, since they told of his journey into the East and 
his return: an adventure which later involved all the Hobbits 
in the great events of that Age that are here related. 

Many, however, may wish to know more about this re- 
markable people from the outset, while some may not possess 
the earlier book. For such readers a few notes on the more 
important points are here collected from Hobbit-lore, and 
the first adventure is briefly recalled. 


Hobbits are an unobtrusive but very ancient people, more 
numerous formerly than they are today; for they love peace 
and quiet and good tilled earth: a well-ordered and well- 
farmed countryside was their favourite haunt. They do not 
and did not understand or like machines more complicated 
than a forge-bellows, a water-mill, or a hand-loom, though 
they were skilful with tools. Even in ancient days they 
were, as a rule, shy of ‘the Big Folk’, as they call us, and 
now they avoid us with dismay and are becoming hard to 
find. They are quick of hearing and sharp-eyed, and though 
they are inclined to be fat and do not hurry unnecessarily, they 
are nonetheless nimble and deft in their movements. They 


2 PROLOGUE 


possessed from the first the art of disappearing swiftly and 
silently, when large folk whom they do not wish to meet come 
blundering by; and this art they have developed until to Men 
it may seem magical. But Hobbits have never, in fact, studied 
magic of any kind, and their elusiveness is due solely to 
a professional skill that heredity and practice, and a close 
friendship with the earth, have rendered inimitable by bigger 
and clumsier races. 

For they are a little people, smaller than Dwarves: less stout 
and stocky, that is, even when they are not actually much 
shorter. Their height is variable, ranging between two and 
four feet of our measure. They seldom now reach three feet; 
but they have dwindled, they say, and in ancient days they 
were taller. According to the Red Book, Bandobras Took 
(Bullroarer), son of Isumbras the Third, was four foot five 
and able to ride a horse. He was surpassed in all Hobbit 
records only by two famous characters of old; but that curious 
matter is dealt with in this book. 

As for the Hobbits of the Shire, with whom these tales are 
concerned, in the days of their peace and prosperity they 
were a merry folk. They dressed in bright colours, being 
notably fond of yellow and green; but they seldom wore 
shoes, since their feet had tough leathery soles and were clad 
in a thick curling hair, much like the hair of their heads, which 
was commonly brown. Thus, the only craft little practised 
among them was shoe-making; but they had long and skilful 
fingers and could make many other useful and comely things. 
Their faces were as a rule good-natured rather than beau- 
tiful, broad, bright-eyed, red-cheeked, with mouths apt to 
laughter, and to eating and drinking. And laugh they did, and 
eat, and drink, often and heartily, being fond of simple jests 
at all times, and of six meals a day (when they could get 
them). They were hospitable and delighted in parties, and in 
presents, which they gave away freely and eagerly accepted. 

It is plain indeed that in spite of later estrangement Hobbits 
are relatives of ours: far nearer to us than Elves, or even than 
Dwarves. Of old they spoke the languages of Men, after their 


PROLOGUE 3 


own fashion, and liked and disliked much the same things as 
Men did. But what exactly our relationship is can no longer 
be discovered. The beginning of Hobbits lies far back in the 
Elder Days that are now lost and forgotten. Only the Elves 
still preserve any records of that vanished time, and their 
traditions are concerned almost entirely with their own his- 
tory, in which Men appear seldom and Hobbits are not men- 
tioned at all. Yet it is clear that Hobbits had, in fact, lived 
quietly in Middle-earth for many long years before other folk 
became even aware of them. And the world being after all 
full of strange creatures beyond count, these little people 
seemed of very little importance. But in the days of Bilbo, 
and of Frodo his heir, they suddenly became, by no wish of 
their own, both important and renowned, and troubled the 
counsels of the Wise and the Great. 


Those days, the Third Age of Middle-earth, are now long 
past, and the shape of all lands has been changed; but the 
regions in which Hobbits then lived were doubtless the same 
as those in which they still linger: the North-West of the Old 
World, east of the Sea. Of their original home the Hobbits 
in Bilbo’s time preserved no knowledge. A love of learning 
(other than genealogical lore) was far from general among 
them, but there remained still a few in the older families who 
studied their own books, and even gathered reports of old 
times and distant lands from Elves, Dwarves, and Men. Their 
own records began only after the settlement of the Shire, and 
their most ancient legends hardly looked further back than 
their Wandering Days. It is clear, nonetheless, from these 
legends, and from the evidence of their peculiar words and 
customs, that like many other folk Hobbits had in the distant 
past moved westward. Their earliest tales seem to glimpse a 
time when they dwelt in the upper vales of Anduin, between 
the eaves of Greenwood the Great and the Misty Mountains. 
Why they later undertook the hard and perilous crossing of 
the mountains into Eriador is no longer certain. Their own 
accounts speak of the multiplying of Men in the land, and of 


4 PROLOGUE 


a shadow that fell on the forest, so that it became darkened 
and its new name was Mirkwood. 

Before the crossing of the mountains the Hobbits had 
already become divided into three somewhat different breeds: 
Harfoots, Stoors, and Fallohides. The Harfoots were browner 
of skin, smaller, and shorter, and they were beardless and 
bootless; their hands and feet were neat and nimble; and they 
preferred highlands and hillsides. The Stoors were broader, 
heavier in build; their feet and hands were larger; and they 
preferred flat lands and riversides. The Fallohides were fairer 
of skin and also of hair, and they were taller and slimmer 
than the others; they were lovers of trees and of woodlands. 

The Harfoots had much to do with Dwarves in ancient 
times, and long lived in the foothills of the mountains. They 
moved westward early, and roamed over Eriador as far as 
Weathertop while the others were still in Wilderland. They 
were the most normal and representative variety of Hobbit, 
and far the most numerous. They were the most inclined to 
settle in one place, and longest preserved their ancestral habit 
of living in tunnels and holes. 

The Stoors lingered long by the banks of the Great River 
Anduin, and were less shy of Men. They came west after the 
Harfoots and followed the course of the Loudwater south- 
wards; and there many of them long dwelt between Tharbad 
and the borders of Dunland before they moved north again. 

The Fallohides, the least numerous, were a northerly 
branch. They were more friendly with Elves than the other 
Hobbits were, and had more skill in language and song than 
in handicrafts; and of old they preferred hunting to tilling. 
They crossed the mountains north of Rivendell and came 
down the River Hoarwell. In Eriador they soon mingled with 
the other kinds that had preceded them, but being somewhat 
bolder and more adventurous, they were often found as 
leaders or chieftains among clans of Harfoots or Stoors. Even 
in Bilbo’s time the strong Fallohidish strain could still be 
noted among the greater families, such as the Tooks and the 
Masters of Buckland. 


PROLOGUE 5 


In the westlands of Eriador, between the Misty Mountains 
and the Mountains of Lune, the Hobbits found both Men and 
Elves. Indeed, a remnant still dwelt there of the Dunedain, the 
kings of Men that came over the Sea out of Westernesse; but 
they were dwindling fast and the lands of their North King- 
dom were falling far and wide into waste. There was room 
and to spare for incomers, and ere long the Hobbits began 
to settle in ordered communities. Most of their earlier settle- 
ments had long disappeared and been forgotten in Bilbo’s 
time; but one of the first to become important still endured, 
though reduced in size; this was at Bree and in the Chetwood 
that lay round about, some forty miles east of the Shire. 

It was in these early days, doubtless, that the Hobbits 
learned their letters and began to write after the manner of 
the Dunedain, who had in their turn long before learned the 
art from the Elves. And in those days also they forgot what- 
ever languages they had used before, and spoke ever after the 
Common Speech, the Westron as it was named, that was 
current through all the lands of the kings from Arnor to 
Gondor, and about all the coasts of the Sea from Belfalas to 
Lune. Yet they kept a few words of their own, as well as their 
own names of months and days, and a great store of personal 
names out of the past. 

About this time legend among the Hobbits first becomes 
history with a reckoning of years. For it was in the one thou- 
sand six hundred and first year of the Third Age that the 
Fallohide brothers, Marcho and Blanco, set out from Bree; 
and having obtained permission from the high king at 
Fornost,* they crossed the brown river Baranduin with a 
great following of Hobbits. They passed over the Bridge of 
Stonebows, that had been built in the days of the power of 
the North Kingdom, and they took all the land beyond to 
dwell in, between the river and the Far Downs. All that was 


* As the records of Gondor relate this was Argeleb II, the twentieth 
of the Northern line, which came to an end with Arvedui three hundred 
years later. 


6 PROLOGUE 


demanded of them was that they should keep the Great 
Bridge in repair, and all other bridges and roads, speed the 
king’s messengers, and acknowledge his lordship. 

Thus began the Shire-reckoning, for the year of the crossing 
of the Brandywine (as the Hobbits turned the name) became 
Year One of the Shire, and all later dates were reckoned from 
it.* At once the western Hobbits fell in love with their new 
land, and they remained there, and soon passed once more 
out of the history of Men and of Elves. While there was still 
a king they were in name his subjects, but they were, in fact, 
ruled by their own chieftains and meddled not at all with 
events in the world outside. To the last battle at Fornost with 
the Witch-lord of Angmar they sent some bowmen to the aid 
of the king, or so they maintained, though no tales of Men 
record it. But in that war the North Kingdom ended; and 
then the Hobbits took the land for their own, and they chose 
from their own chiefs a Thain to hold the authority of the 
king that was gone. There for a thousand years they were 
little troubled by wars, and they prospered and multiplied 
after the Dark Plague (S.R. 37) until the disaster of the Long 
Winter and the famine that followed it. Many thousands then 
perished, but the Days of Dearth (1158-60) were at the time 
of this tale long past and the Hobbits had again become 
accustomed to plenty. The land was rich and kindly, and 
though it had long been deserted when they entered it, it had 
before been well tilled, and there the king had once had many 
farms, cornlands, vineyards, and woods. 

Forty leagues it stretched from the Far Downs to the 
Brandywine Bridge, and fifty from the northern moors to 
the marshes in the south. The Hobbits named it the Shire, 
as the region of the authority of their Thain, and a district 
of well-ordered business; and there in that pleasant corner of 
the world they plied their well-ordered business of living, and 


* Thus, the years of the Third Age in the reckoning of the Elves and 
the Dunedain may be found by adding 1600 to the dates of Shire- 
reckoning. 


PROLOGUE 7 


they heeded less and less the world outside where dark things 
moved, until they came to think that peace and plenty were 
the rule in Middle-earth and the right of all sensible folk. 
They forgot or ignored what little they had ever known of 
the Guardians, and of the labours of those that made possible 
the long peace of the Shire. They were, in fact, sheltered, but 
they had ceased to remember it. 

At no time had Hobbits of any kind been warlike, and they 
had never fought among themselves. In olden days they had, 
of course, been often obliged to fight to maintain themselves 
in a hard world; but in Bilbo’s time that was very ancient 
history. The last battle, before this story opens, and indeed 
the only one that had ever been fought within the borders 
of the Shire, was beyond living memory: the Battle of 
Greenfields, S.R. 1147, in which Bandobras Took routed an 
invasion of Orcs. Even the weathers had grown milder, and 
the wolves that had once come ravening out of the North in 
bitter white winters were now only a grandfather’s tale. So, 
though there was still some store of weapons in the Shire, 
these were used mostly as trophies, hanging above hearths or 
on walls, or gathered into the museum at Michel Delving. 
The Mathom-house it was called; for anything that Hobbits 
had no immediate use for, but were unwilling to throw away, 
they called a mathom. Their dwellings were apt to become 
rather crowded with mathoms, and many of the presents that 
passed from hand to hand were of that sort. 

Nonetheless, ease and peace had left this people still curi- 
ously tough. They were, if it came to it, difficult to daunt or 
to kill; and they were, perhaps, so unwearyingly fond of good 
things not least because they could, when put to it, do without 
them, and could survive rough handling by grief, foe, or 
weather in a way that astonished those who did not know 
them well and looked no further than their bellies and their 
well-fed faces. Though slow to quarrel, and for sport killing 
nothing that lived, they were doughty at bay, and at need 
could still handle arms. They shot well with the bow, for they 
were keen-eyed and sure at the mark. Not only with bows and 


8 PROLOGUE 


arrows. If any Hobbit stooped for a stone, it was well to get 
quickly under cover, as all trespassing beasts knew very well. 

All Hobbits had originally lived in holes in the ground, or 
so they believed, and in such dwellings they still felt most at 
home; but in the course of time they had been obliged to 
adopt other forms of abode. Actually in the Shire in Bilbo’s 
days it was, as arule, only the richest and the poorest Hobbits 
that maintained the old custom. The poorest went on living 
in burrows of the most primitive kind, mere holes indeed, 
with only one window or none; while the well-to-do still 
constructed more luxurious versions of the simple diggings 
of old. But suitable sites for these large and ramifying tunnels 
(or smials as they called them) were not everywhere to be 
found; and in the flats and the low-lying districts the Hobbits, 
as they multiplied, began to build above ground. Indeed, even 
in the hilly regions and the older villages, such as Hobbiton 
or Tuckborough, or in the chief township of the Shire, Michel 
Delving on the White Downs, there were now many houses 
of wood, brick, or stone. These were specially favoured by 
millers, smiths, ropers, and cartwrights, and others of that 
sort; for even when they had holes to live in, Hobbits had 
long been accustomed to build sheds and workshops. 

The habit of building farmhouses and barns was said to 
have begun among the inhabitants of the Marish down by 
the Brandywine. The Hobbits of that quarter, the East- 
farthing, were rather large and heavy-legged, and they wore 
dwarf-boots in muddy weather. But they were well known to 
be Stoors in a large part of their blood, as indeed was shown 
by the down that many grew on their chins. No Harfoot or 
Fallohide had any trace of a beard. Indeed, the folk of the 
Marish, and of Buckland, east of the River, which they after- 
wards occupied, came for the most part later into the Shire 
up from south-away; and they still had many peculiar names 
and strange words not found elsewhere in the Shire. 

It is probable that the craft of building, as many other crafts 
beside, was derived from the Duinedain. But the Hobbits may 
have learned it direct from the Elves, the teachers of Men in 


PROLOGUE 9 


their youth. For the Elves of the High Kindred had not yet 
forsaken Middle-earth, and they dwelt still at that time at the 
Grey Havens away to the west, and in other places within 
reach of the Shire. Three Elf-towers of immemorial age were 
still to be seen on the Tower Hills beyond the western 
marches. They shone far off in the moonlight. The tallest 
was furthest away, standing alone upon a green mound. The 
Hobbits of the Westfarthing said that one could see the Sea 
from the top of that tower; but no Hobbit had ever been 
known to climb it. Indeed, few Hobbits had ever seen or 
sailed upon the Sea, and fewer still had ever returned to 
report it. Most Hobbits regarded even rivers and small boats 
with deep misgivings, and not many of them could swim. 
And as the days of the Shire lengthened they spoke less and 
less with the Elves, and grew afraid of them, and distrustful 
of those that had dealings with them; and the Sea became a 
word of fear among them, and a token of death, and they 
turned their faces away from the hills in the west. 

The craft of building may have come from Elves or Men, 
but the Hobbits used it in their own fashion. They did not 
go in for towers. Their houses were usually long, low, and 
comfortable. The oldest kind were, indeed, no more than 
built imitations of smials, thatched with dry grass or straw, or 
roofed with turves, and having walls somewhat bulged. That 
stage, however, belonged to the early days of the Shire, and 
hobbit-building had long since been altered, improved by 
devices, learned from Dwarves, or discovered by themselves. 
A preference for round windows, and even round doors, was 
the chief remaining peculiarity of hobbit-architecture. 

The houses and the holes of Shire-hobbits were often large, 
and inhabited by large families. (Bilbo and Frodo Baggins 
were as bachelors very exceptional, as they were also in many 
other ways, such as their friendship with the Elves.) Some- 
times, as in the case of the Tooks of Great Smials, or the 
Brandybucks of Brandy Hall, many generations of relatives 
lived in (comparative) peace together in one ancestral and 
many-tunnelled mansion. All Hobbits were, in any case, 


se) PROLOGUE 


clannish and reckoned up their relationships with great care. 
They drew long and elaborate family-trees with innumerable 
branches. In dealing with Hobbits it is important to remember 
who is related to whom, and in what degree. It would be 
impossible in this book to set out a family-tree that included 
even the more important members of the more important 
families at the time which these tales tell of. The genealogical 
trees at the end of the Red Book of Westmarch are a small 
book in themselves, and all but Hobbits would find them 
exceedingly dull. Hobbits delighted in such things, if they were 
accurate: they liked to have books filled with things that they 
already knew, set out fair and square with no contradictions. 


2 
Concerning Pipe-weed 


There is another astonishing thing about Hobbits of old that 
must be mentioned, an astonishing habit: they imbibed or 
inhaled, through pipes of clay or wood, the smoke of the 
burning leaves of a herb, which they called pzpe-weed or leaf, 
a variety probably of Nicotiana. A great deal of mystery 
surrounds the origin of this peculiar custom, or ‘art’ as the 
Hobbits preferred to call it. All that could be discovered about 
it in antiquity was put together by Meriadoc Brandybuck 
(ater Master of Buckland), and since he and the tobacco of 
the Southfarthing play a part in the history that follows, his 
remarks in the introduction to his Herblore of the Shire may 
be quoted. 

“This,” he says, ‘is the one art that we can certainly claim 
to be our own invention. When Hobbits first began to smoke 
is not known, all the legends and family histories take it for 
granted; for ages folk in the Shire smoked various herbs, some 
fouler, some sweeter. But all accounts agree that Tobold 
Hornblower of Longbottom in the Southfarthing first grew 
the true pipe-weed in his gardens in the days of Isengrim the 
Second, about the year 1070 of Shire-reckoning. The best 


PROLOGUE II 


home-grown still comes from that district, especially the 
varieties now known as Longbottom Leaf, Old Toby, and 
Southern Star. 

‘How Old Toby came by the plant is not recorded, for to 
his dying day he would not tell. He knew much about herbs, 
but he was no traveller. It is said that in his youth he went 
often to Bree, though he certainly never went further from 
the Shire than that. It is thus quite possible that he learned 
of this plant in Bree, where now, at any rate, it grows well on 
the south slopes of the hill. The Bree-hobbits claim to have 
been the first actual smokers of the pipe-weed. They claim, 
of course, to have done everything before the people of the 
Shire, whom they refer to as “‘colonists”’; but in this case their 
claim is, I think, likely to be true. And certainly it was from 
Bree that the art of smoking the genuine weed spread in 
the recent centuries among Dwarves and such other folk, 
Rangers, Wizards, or wanderers, as still passed to and fro 
through that ancient road-meeting. The home and centre of 
the art is thus to be found in the old inn of Bree, The Prancing 
Pony, that has been kept by the family of Butterbur from 
time beyond record. 

‘All the same, observations that I have made on my own 
many journeys south have convinced me that the weed itself 
is not native to our parts of the world, but came northward 
from the lower Anduin, whither it was, I suspect, originally 
brought over Sea by the Men of Westernesse. It grows abund- 
antly in Gondor, and there is richer and larger than in the 
North, where it is never found wild, and flourishes only in 
warm sheltered places like Longbottom. The Men of Gondor 
call it sweet galenas, and esteem it only for the fragrance of its 
flowers. From that land it must have been carried up the 
Greenway during the long centuries between the coming of 
Elendil and our own days. But even the Dunedain of Gondor 
allow us this credit: Hobbits first put it into pipes. Not even 
the Wizards first thought of that before we did. Though one 
Wizard that I knew took up the art long ago, and became as 
skilful in it as in all other things that he put his mind to.’ 


12 PROLOGUE 


3 
Of the Ordering of the Shire 


The Shire was divided into four quarters, the Farthings 
already referred to, North, South, East, and West; and these 
again each into a number of folklands, which still bore the 
names of some of the old leading families, although by the 
time of this history these names were no longer found only 
in their proper folklands. Nearly all Tooks still lived in the 
Tookland, but that was not true of many other families, such 
as the Bagginses or the Boffins. Outside the Farthings were 
the East and West Marches: the Buckland (p. 129); and the 
Westmarch added to the Shire in S.R. 1452. 

The Shire at this time had hardly any ‘government’. 
Families for the most part managed their own affairs. Grow- 
ing food and eating it occupied most of their time. In 
other matters they were, as a rule, generous and not greedy, 
but contented and moderate, so that estates, farms, work- 
shops, and small trades tended to remain unchanged for 
generations. 

There remained, of course, the ancient tradition concern- 
ing the high king at Fornost, or Norbury as they called it, 
away north of the Shire. But there had been no king for nearly 
a thousand years, and even the ruins of Kings’ Norbury were 
covered with grass. Yet the Hobbits still said of wild folk and 
wicked things (such as trolls) that they had not heard of the 
king. For they attributed to the king of old all their essential 
laws; and usually they kept the laws of free will, because they 
were The Rules (as they said), both ancient and just. 

It is true that the Took family had long been pre-eminent; 
for the office of Thain had passed to them (from the Old- 
bucks) some centuries before, and the chief Took had borne 
that title ever since. The Thain was the master of the Shire- 
moot, and captain of the Shire-muster and the Hobbitry-in- 
arms; but as muster and moot were only held in times of 
emergency, which no longer occurred, the Thainship had 
ceased to be more than a nominal dignity. The Took family 


PROLOGUE 13 


was still, indeed, accorded a special respect, for it remained 
both numerous and exceedingly wealthy, and was liable to 
produce in every generation strong characters of peculiar 
habits and even adventurous temperament. The latter quali- 
ties, however, were now rather tolerated (in the rich) than 
generally approved. The custom endured, nonetheless, of 
referring to the head of the family as The Took, and of 
adding to his name, if required, a number: such as Isengrim 
the Second, for instance. 

The only real official in the Shire at this date was the Mayor 
of Michel Delving (or of the Shire), who was elected every 
seven years at the Free Fair on the White Downs at the Lithe, 
that is at Midsummer. As mayor almost his only duty was 
to preside at banquets, given on the Shire-holidays, which 
occurred at frequent intervals. But the offices of Postmaster 
and First Shirriff were attached to the mayoralty, so that he 
managed both the Messenger Service and the Watch. These 
were the only Shire-services, and the Messengers were the 
most numerous, and much the busier of the two. By no 
means all Hobbits were lettered, but those who were wrote 
constantly to all their friends (and a selection of their 
relations) who lived further off than an afternoon’s walk. 

The Shirriffs was the name that the Hobbits gave to their 
police, or the nearest equivalent that they possessed. They 
had, of course, no uniforms (such things being quite un- 
known), only a feather in their caps; and they were in practice 
rather haywards than policemen, more concerned with the 
strayings of beasts than of people. There were in all the Shire 
only twelve of them, three in each Farthing, for Inside Work. 
A rather larger body, varying at need, was employed to ‘beat 
the bounds’, and to see that Outsiders of any kind, great or 
small, did not make themselves a nuisance. 

At the time when this story begins the Bounders, as they 
were called, had been greatly increased. There were many 
reports and complaints of strange persons and creatures 
prowling about the borders, or over them: the first sign that 
all was not quite as it should be, and always had been except 


14 PROLOGUE 


in tales and legends of long ago. Few heeded the sign, and 
not even Bilbo yet had any notion of what it portended. Sixty 
years had passed since he set out on his memorable journey, 
and he was old even for Hobbits, who reached a hundred 
as often as not; but much evidently still remained of the 
considerable wealth that he had brought back. How much or 
how little he revealed to no one, not even to Frodo his favour- 
ite ‘nephew’. And he still kept secret the ring that he had 
found. 


4 
Of the Finding of the Ring 


As is told in The Hobbit, there came one day to Bilbo’s door the 
great Wizard, Gandalf the Grey, and thirteen dwarves with 
him: none other, indeed, than Thorin Oakenshield, descend- 
ant of kings, and his twelve companions in exile. With them 
he set out, to his own lasting astonishment, on a morning of 
April, it being then the year 1341 Shire-reckoning, on a quest 
of great treasure, the dwarf-hoards of the Kings under the 
Mountain, beneath Erebor in Dale, far off in the East. The 
quest was successful, and the Dragon that guarded the hoard 
was destroyed. Yet, though before all was won the Battle of 
Five Armies was fought, and Thorin was slain, and many 
deeds of renown were done, the matter would scarcely have 
concerned later history, or earned more than a note in 
the long annals of the Third Age, but for an ‘accident’ by the 
way. The party was assailed by Orcs in a high pass of the 
Misty Mountains as they went towards Wilderland; and so it 
happened that Bilbo was lost for a while in the black orc- 
mines deep under the mountains, and there, as he groped in 
vain in the dark, he put his hand on a ring, lying on the floor 
of a tunnel. He put it in his pocket. It seemed then like mere 
luck. 

Trying to find his way out, Bilbo went on down to the 
roots of the mountains, until he could go no further. At the 


PROLOGUE 15 


bottom of the tunnel lay a cold lake far from the light, and 
on an island of rock in the water lived Gollum. He was a 
loathsome little creature: he paddled a small boat with his 
large flat feet, peering with pale luminous eyes and catching 
blind fish with his long fingers, and eating them raw. He ate 
any living thing, even orc, if he could catch it and strangle it 
without a struggle. He possessed a secret treasure that had 
come to him long ages ago, when he still lived in the light: a 
ring of gold that made its wearer invisible. It was the one 
thing he loved, his ‘Precious’, and he talked to it, even when 
it was not with him. For he kept it hidden safe in a hole on 
his island, except when he was hunting or spying on the orcs 
of the mines. 

Maybe he would have attacked Bilbo at once, if the ring 
had been on him when they met; but it was not, and the 
hobbit held in his hand an Elvish knife, which served him as 
a sword. So to gain time Gollum challenged Bilbo to the 
Riddle-game, saying that if he asked a riddle which Bilbo 
could not guess, then he would kill him and eat him; but if 
Bilbo defeated him, then he would do as Bilbo wished: he 
would lead him to a way out of the tunnels. 

Since he was lost in the dark without hope, and could 
neither go on nor back, Bilbo accepted the challenge; and 
they asked one another many riddles. In the end Bilbo won 
the game, more by luck (as it seemed) than by wits; for he 
was stumped at last for a riddle to ask, and cried out, as his 
hand came upon the ring he had picked up and forgotten: 
What have I got in my pocket? This Gollum failed to answer, 
though he demanded three guesses. 

The Authorities, it is true, differ whether this last question 
was a mere ‘question’ and not a ‘riddle’ according to the strict 
rules of the Game; but all agree that, after accepting it and 
trying to guess the answer, Gollum was bound by his 
promise. And Bilbo pressed him to keep his word; for the 
thought came to him that this slimy creature might prove 
false, even though such promises were held sacred, and of 
old all but the wickedest things feared to break them. But 


16 PROLOGUE 


after ages alone in the dark Gollum’s heart was black, and 
treachery was in it. He slipped away, and returned to his 
island, of which Bilbo knew nothing, not far off in the dark 
water. There, he thought, lay his ring. He was hungry now, 
and angry, and once his ‘Precious’ was with him he would 
not fear any weapon at all. 

But the ring was not on the island; he had lost it, it was 
gone. His screech sent a shiver down Bilbo’s back, though he 
did not yet understand what had happened. But Gollum had 
at last leaped to a guess, too late. What has it got in its 
pocketses? he cried. The light in his eyes was like a green 
flame as he sped back to murder the hobbit and recover his 
‘Precious’. Just in time Bilbo saw his peril, and he fled blindly 
up the passage away from the water; and once more he was 
saved by his luck. For as he ran he put his hand in his pocket, 
and the ring slipped quietly on to his finger. So it was that 
Gollum passed him without seeing him, and went to guard 
the way out, lest the ‘thief’ should escape. Warily Bilbo fol- 
lowed him, as he went along, cursing, and talking to himself 
about his ‘Precious’; from which talk at last even Bilbo 
guessed the truth, and hope came to him in the darkness: he 
himself had found the marvellous ring and a chance of escape 
from the orcs and from Gollum. 

At length they came to a halt before an unseen opening 
that led to the lower gates of the mines, on the eastward side 
of the mountains. There Gollum crouched at bay, smelling 
and listening; and Bilbo was tempted to slay him with his 
sword. But pity stayed him, and though he kept the ring, in 
which his only hope lay, he would not use it to help him kill 
the wretched creature at a disadvantage. In the end, gathering 
his courage, he leaped over Gollum in the dark, and fled 
away down the passage, pursued by his enemy’s cries of hate 
and despair: Thief, thief! Baggins! We hates it for ever! 


Now it is a curious fact that this is not the story as Bilbo 
first told it to his companions. To them his account was that 
Gollum had promised to give him a present, if he won the 


PROLOGUE t7 


game; but when Gollum went to fetch it from his island he 
found the treasure was gone: a magic ring, which had been 
given to him long ago on his birthday. Bilbo guessed that this 
was the very ring that he had found, and as he had won the 
game, it was already his by right. But being in a tight place, 
he said nothing about it, and made Gollum show him the 
way out, as a reward instead of a present. This account Bilbo 
set down in his memoirs, and he seems never to have altered 
it himself, not even after the Council of Elrond. Evidently it 
still appeared in the original Red Book, as it did in several of 
the copies and abstracts. But many copies contain the true 
account (as an alternative), derived no doubt from notes by 
Frodo or Samwise, both of whom learned the truth, though 
they seem to have been unwilling to delete anything actually 
written by the old hobbit himself. 

Gandalf, however, disbelieved Bilbo’s first story, as soon 
as he heard it, and he continued to be very curious about the 
ring. Eventually he got the true tale out of Bilbo after much 
questioning, which for a while strained their friendship; but 
the wizard seemed to think the truth important. Though he 
did not say so to Bilbo, he also thought it important, and 
disturbing, to find that the good hobbit had not told the 
truth from the first: quite contrary to his habit. The idea of a 
‘present’ was not mere hobbitlike invention, all the same. It 
was suggested to Bilbo, as he confessed, by Gollum’s talk 
that he overheard; for Gollum did, in fact, call the ring his 
‘birthday-present’, many times. That also Gandalf thought 
strange and suspicious; but he did not discover the truth 
in this point for many more years, as will be seen in this 
book. 


Of Bilbo’s later adventures little more need be said here. 
With the help of the ring he escaped from the orc-guards at 
the gate and rejoined his companions. He used the ring many 
times on his quest, chiefly for the help of his friends; but he 
kept it secret from them as long as he could. After his return 
to his home he never spoke of it again to anyone, save Gandalf 


18 NOTE ON THE SHIRE RECORDS 


and Frodo; and no one else in the Shire knew of its existence, 
or so he believed. Only to Frodo did he show the account of 
his Journey that he was writing. 

His sword, Sting, Bilbo hung over his fireplace, and his 
coat of marvellous mail, the gift of the Dwarves from the 
Dragon-hoard, he lent to a museum, to the Michel Delving 
Mathom-house in fact. But he kept in a drawer at Bag End 
the old cloak and hood that he had worn on his travels; 
and the ring, secured by a fine chain, remained in his 
pocket. 

He returned to his home at Bag End on June the 22nd in 
his fifty-second year (S.R. 1342), and nothing very notable 
occurred in the Shire until Mr. Baggins began the prep- 
arations for the celebration of his hundred-and-eleventh 
birthday (S.R. 1401). At this point this History begins. 


NOTE ON THE SHIRE RECORDS 


At the end of the Third Age the part played by the Hobbits 
in the great events that led to the inclusion of the Shire in the 
Reunited Kingdom awakened among them a more wide- 
spread interest in their own history; and many of their tra- 
ditions, up to that time still mainly oral, were collected and 
written down. The greater families were also concerned with 
events in the Kingdom at large, and many of their members 
studied its ancient histories and legends. By the end of the 
first century of the Fourth Age there were already to be found 
in the Shire several libraries that contained many historical 
books and records. 

The largest of these collections were probably at Under- 
towers, at Great Smials, and at Brandy Hall. This account of 
the end of the Third Age is drawn mainly from the Red Book 
of Westmarch. That most important source for the history 
of the War of the Ring was so called because it was long 
preserved at Undertowers, the home of the Fairbairns, 


NOTE ON THE SHIRE RECORDS 19 


Wardens of the Westmarch.* It was in origin Bilbo’s private 
diary, which he took with him to Rivendell. Frodo brought it 
back to the Shire, together with many loose leaves of notes, 
and during S.R. 1420-1 he nearly filled its pages with his 
account of the War. But annexed to it and preserved with it, 
probably in a single red case, were the three large volumes, 
bound in red leather, that Bilbo gave to him as a parting gift. 
To these four volumes there was added in Westmarch a 
fifth containing commentaries, genealogies, and various other 
matter concerning the hobbit members of the Fellowship. 

The original Red Book has not been preserved, but many 
copies were made, especially of the first volume, for the use 
of the descendants of the children of Master Samwise. The 
most important copy, however, has a different history. It was 
kept at Great Smials, but it was written in Gondor, probably 
at the request of the great-grandson of Peregrin, and com- 
pleted in S.R. 1592 (F.A. 172). Its southern scribe appended 
this note: Findegil, King’s Writer, finished this work in IV 
172. It is an exact copy in all details of the Thain’s Book in 
Minas Tirith. That book was a copy, made at the request of 
King Elessar, of the Red Book of the Periannath, and was 
brought to him by the Thain Peregrin when he retired to 
Gondor in IV 64. 

The Thain’s Book was thus the first copy made of the Red 
Book and contained much that was later omitted or lost. In 
Minas Tirith it received much annotation, and many correc- 
tions, especially of names, words, and quotations in the Elvish 
languages; and there was added to it an abbreviated version 
of those parts of The Tale of Aragorn and Arwen which lie 
outside the account of the War. The full tale is stated to have 
been written by Barahir, grandson of the Steward Faramir, 
some time after the passing of the King. But the chief impor- 
tance of Findegil’s copy is that it alone contains the whole of 
Bilbo’s “Translations from the Elvish’. These three volumes 


* See Appendix B: annals 1451, 1462, 1482; and note at end of 
Appendix C. 


20 NOTE ON THE SHIRE RECORDS 


were found to be a work of great skill and learning in which, 
between 1403 and 1418, he had used all the sources available 
to him in Rivendell, both living and written. But since they 
were little used by Frodo, being almost entirely concerned 
with the Elder Days, no more is said of them here. 

Since Meriadoc and Peregrin became the heads of their 
great families, and at the same time kept up their connexions 
with Rohan and Gondor, the libraries at Bucklebury and 
Tuckborough contained much that did not appear in the Red 
Book. In Brandy Hall there were many works dealing with 
Eriador and the history of Rohan. Some of these were 
composed or begun by Meriadoc himself, though in the Shire 
he was chiefly remembered for his Herblore of the Shire, and 
for his Reckoning of Years in which he discussed the relation 
of the calendars of the Shire and Bree to those of Rivendell, 
Gondor, and Rohan. He also wrote a short treatise on Old 
Words and Names in the Shire, showing special interest in 
discovering the kinship with the language of the Rohirrim 
of such ‘shire-words’ as mathom and old elements in place 
names. 

At Great Smials the books were of less interest to Shire- 
folk, though more important for larger history. None of them 
was written by Peregrin, but he and his successors collected 
many manuscripts written by scribes of Gondor: mainly 
copies or summaries of histories or legends relating to Elendil 
and his heirs. Only here in the Shire were to be found exten- 
sive materials for the history of Numenor and the arising of 
Sauron. It was probably at Great Smials that The Tale of 
Years* was put together, with the assistance of material 
collected by Meriadoc. Though the dates given are often 
conjectural, especially for the Second Age, they deserve atten- 
tion. It is probable that Meriadoc obtained assistance and 
information from Rivendell, which he visited more than once. 
There, though Elrond had departed, his sons long remained, 


* Represented in much reduced form in Appendix B as far as the 
end of the Third Age. 


NOTE ON THE SHIRE RECORDS 21 


together with some of the High-elven folk. It is said that 
Celeborn went to dwell there after the departure of Galadriel; 
but there is no record of the day when at last he sought the 
Grey Havens, and with him went the last living memory of 
the Elder Days in Middle-earth. 


THE FELLOWSHIP 
OF THE RING 


BEING THE FIRST PART 
OF 


The Lord of the Rings 


“ 
ONIHLYS Re 
HL N/OS 


\ 
QO2\TT1H, 
LRN? 3¥ 0 


BOOK ONE 


Chapter I 


A LONG-EXPECTED PARTY 


When Mr. Bilbo Baggins of Bag End announced that he 
would shortly be celebrating his eleventy-first birthday with 
a party of special magnificence, there was much talk and 
excitement in Hobbiton. 

Bilbo was very rich and very peculiar, and had been the 
wonder of the Shire for sixty years, ever since his remarkable 
disappearance and unexpected return. The riches he had 
brought back from his travels had now become a local legend, 
and it was popularly believed, whatever the old folk might 
say, that the Hill at Bag End was full of tunnels stuffed with 
treasure. And if that was not enough for fame, there was also 
his prolonged vigour to marvel at. Time wore on, but it 
seemed to have little effect on Mr. Baggins. At ninety he was 
much the same as at fifty. At ninety-nine they began to call 
him well-preserved; but unchanged would have been nearer the 
mark. There were some that shook their heads and thought 
this was too much of a good thing; it seemed unfair that 
anyone should possess (apparently) perpetual youth as well 
as (reputedly) inexhaustible wealth. 

‘It will have to be paid for,’ they said. ‘It isn’t natural, and 
trouble will come of it!’ 


But so far trouble had not come; and as Mr. Baggins was 
generous with his money, most people were willing to for- 
give him his oddities and his good fortune. He remained 
on visiting terms with his relatives (except, of course, the 
Sackville-Bagginses), and he had many devoted admirers 
among the hobbits of poor and unimportant families. But he 
had no close friends, until some of his younger cousins began 
to grow up. 


28 THE FELLOWSHIP OF THE RING 


The eldest of these, and Bilbo’s favourite, was young Frodo 
Baggins. When Bilbo was ninety-nine he adopted Frodo as 
his heir, and brought him to live at Bag End; and the hopes of 
the Sackville-Bagginses were finally dashed. Bilbo and Frodo 
happened to have the same birthday, September 22nd. ‘You 
had better come and live here, Frodo my lad,’ said Bilbo 
one day; ‘and then we can celebrate our birthday-parties 
comfortably together.’ At that time Frodo was still in his 
tweens, as the hobbits called the irresponsible twenties 
between childhood and coming of age at thirty-three. 


‘Twelve more years passed. Each year the Bagginses had 
given very lively combined birthday-parties at Bag End; but 
now it was understood that something quite exceptional 
was being planned for that autumn. Bilbo was going to be 
eleventy-one, III, a rather curious number, and a very re- 
spectable age for a hobbit (the Old Took himself had only 
reached 130); and Frodo was going to be thirty-three, 33, an 
important number: the date of his “coming of age’. 

‘Tongues began to wag in Hobbiton and Bywater; and 
rumour of the coming event travelled all over the Shire. The 
history and character of Mr. Bilbo Baggins became once 
again the chief topic of conversation; and the older folk 
suddenly found their reminiscences in welcome demand. 

No one had a more attentive audience than old Ham 
Gamgee, commonly known as the Gaffer. He held forth at 
The Ivy Bush, a small inn on the Bywater road; and he spoke 
with some authority, for he had tended the garden at Bag 
End for forty years, and had helped old Holman in the same 
job before that. Now that he was himself growing old and 
stiff in the joints, the job was mainly carried on by his young- 
est son, Sam Gamgee. Both father and son were on very 
friendly terms with Bilbo and Frodo. They lived on the Hill 
itself, in Number 3 Bagshot Row just below Bag End. 

‘A very nice well-spoken gentlehobbit is Mr. Bilbo, as I’ve 
always said,’ the Gaffer declared. With perfect truth: for Bilbo 
was very polite to him, calling him ‘Master Hamfast’, and 


A LONG-EXPECTED PARTY 29 


consulting him constantly upon the growing of vegetables — 
in the matter of ‘roots’, especially potatoes, the Gaffer was 
recognized as the leading authority by all in the neighbour- 
hood (including himself). 

‘But what about this Frodo that lives with him?’ asked Old 
Noakes of Bywater. “Baggins is his name, but he’s more than 
half a Brandybuck, they say. It beats me why any Baggins 
of Hobbiton should go looking for a wife away there in 
Buckland, where folks are so queer.’ 

‘And no wonder they’re queer,’ put in Daddy Twofoot 
(the Gaffer’s next-door neighbour), ‘if they live on the wrong 
side of the Brandywine River, and right agin the Old Forest. 
That’s a dark bad place, if half the tales be true.’ 

“Youre right, Dad!’ said the Gaffer. ‘Not that the Brandy- 
bucks of Buckland live 77 the Old Forest; but they’re a queer 
breed, seemingly. They fool about with boats on that big 
river — and that isn’t natural. Small wonder that trouble came 
of it, I say. But be that as it may, Mr. Frodo is as nice a 
young hobbit as you could wish to meet. Very much like 
Mr. Bilbo, and in more than looks. After all his father was 
a Baggins. A decent respectable hobbit was Mr. Drogo 
Baggins; there was never much to tell of him, till he was 
drownded.’ 

‘Drownded?’ said several voices. They had heard this and 
other darker rumours before, of course; but hobbits have a 
passion for family history, and they were ready to hear it 
again. 

‘Well, so they say,’ said the Gaffer. “You see: Mr. Drogo, 
he married poor Miss Primula Brandybuck. She was our Mr. 
Bilbo’s first cousin on the mother’s side (her mother being 
the youngest of the Old Took’s daughters); and Mr. Drogo 
was his second cousin. So Mr. Frodo is his first and second 
cousin, once removed either way, as the saying is, if you 
follow me. And Mr. Drogo was staying at Brandy Hall with 
his father-in-law, old Master Gorbadoc, as he often did 
after his marriage (him being partial to his vittles, and old 
Gorbadoc keeping a mighty generous table); and he went out 


30 THE FELLOWSHIP OF THE RING 


boating on the Brandywine River; and he and his wife were 
drownded, and poor Mr. Frodo only a child and all.’ 

‘ve heard they went on the water after dinner in the 
moonlight,’ said Old Noakes; ‘and it was Drogo’s weight as 
sunk the boat.’ 

‘And I heard she pushed him in, and he pulled her in after 
him,’ said Sandyman, the Hobbiton miller. 

“You shouldn’t listen to all you hear, Sandyman,’ said the 
Gaffer, who did not much like the miller. “There isn’t no call 
to go talking of pushing and pulling. Boats are quite tricky 
enough for those that sit still without looking further for the 
cause of trouble. Anyway: there was this Mr. Frodo left an 
orphan and stranded, as you might say, among those queer 
Bucklanders, being brought up anyhow in Brandy Hall. A 
regular warren, by all accounts. Old Master Gorbadoc never 
had fewer than a couple of hundred relations in the place. 
Mr. Bilbo never did a kinder deed than when he brought the 
lad back to live among decent folk. 

‘But I reckon it was a nasty knock for those Sackville- 
Bagginses. They thought they were going to get Bag End, 
that time when he went off and was thought to be dead. And 
then he comes back and orders them off; and he goes on 
living and living, and never looking a day older, bless him! 
And suddenly he produces an heir, and has all the papers 
made out proper. The Sackville-Bagginses won’t never see 
the inside of Bag End now, or it is to be hoped not.’ 

“There’s a tidy bit of money tucked away up there, I hear 
tell,” said a stranger, a visitor on business from Michel 
Delving in the Westfarthing. ‘All the top of your hill is full of 
tunnels packed with chests of gold and silver, and jools, by 
what I’ve heard.’ 

“Then you’ve heard more than I can speak to,’ answered 
the Gaffer. ‘I know nothing about jools. Mr. Bilbo is free with 
his money, and there seems no lack of it; but I know of no 
tunnel-making. I saw Mr. Bilbo when he came back, a matter 
of sixty years ago, when I was a lad. [d not long come 
prentice to old Holman (him being my dad’s cousin), but he 


A LONG-EXPECTED PARTY 31 


had me up at Bag End helping him to keep folks from tram- 
pling and trapessing all over the garden while the sale was 
on. And in the middle of it all Mr. Bilbo comes up the Hill 
with a pony and some mighty big bags and a couple of chests. 
I don’t doubt they were mostly full of treasure he had picked 
up in foreign parts, where there be mountains of gold, they 
say; but there wasn’t enough to fill tunnels. But my lad Sam 
will know more about that. He’s in and out of Bag End. 
Crazy about stories of the old days, he is, and he listens to 
all Mr. Bilbo’s tales. Mr. Bilbo has learned him his letters — 
meaning no harm, mark you, and I hope no harm will come 
of it. 

‘Elves and Dragons! I says to him. Cabbages and potatoes are 
better for me and you. Don’t go getting mixed up in the business 
of vour betters, or you'll land in trouble too big for you, I says to 
him. And I might say it to others,’ he added with a look at 
the stranger and the miller. 

But the Gaffer did not convince his audience. The legend 
of Bilbo’s wealth was now too firmly fixed in the minds of 
the younger generation of hobbits. 

‘Ah, but he has likely enough been adding to what he 
brought at first,’ argued the miller, voicing common opinion. 
‘He’s often away from home. And look at the outlandish folk 
that visit him: dwarves coming at night, and that old wandering 
conjuror, Gandalf, and all. You can say what you like, Gaffer, 
but Bag End’s a queer place, and its folk are queerer.’ 

‘And you can say what you like, about what you know no 
more of than you do of boating, Mr. Sandyman,’ retorted 
the Gaffer, disliking the miller even more than usual. ‘If that’s 
being queer, then we could do with a bit more queerness in 
these parts. There’s some not far away that wouldn’t offer a 
pint of beer to a friend, if they lived in a hole with golden 
walls. But they do things proper at Bag End. Our Sam says 
that everyone’s going to be invited to the party, and there’s 
going to be presents, mark you, presents for all — this very 
month as is.’ 


32 THE FELLOWSHIP OF THE RING 


That very month was September, and as fine as you could 
ask. A day or two later a rumour (probably started by the 
knowledgeable Sam) was spread about that there were going 
to be fireworks — fireworks, what is more, such as had not 
been seen in the Shire for nigh on a century, not indeed since 
the Old Took died. 

Days passed and The Day drew nearer. An odd-looking 
waggon laden with odd-looking packages rolled into Hobbi- 
ton one evening and toiled up the Hill to Bag End. The 
startled hobbits peered out of lamplit doors to gape at it. It 
was driven by outlandish folk, singing strange songs: dwarves 
with long beards and deep hoods. A few of them remained 
at Bag End. At the end of the second week in September a 
cart came in through Bywater from the direction of Brandy- 
wine Bridge in broad daylight. An old man was driving it all 
alone. He wore a tall pointed blue hat, a long grey cloak, and 
a silver scarf. He had a long white beard and bushy eyebrows 
that stuck out beyond the brim of his hat. Small hobbit- 
children ran after the cart all through Hobbiton and right up 
the hill. It had a cargo of fireworks, as they rightly guessed. 
At Bilbo’s front door the old man began to unload: there 
were great bundles of fireworks of all sorts and shapes, each 
labelled with a large red G ¥F and the elf-rune, 

That was Gandalf’s mark, of course, and the old man 
was Gandalf the Wizard, whose fame in the Shire was due 
mainly to his skill with fires, smokes, and lights. His real 
business was far more difficult and dangerous, but the 
Shire-folk knew nothing about it. To them he was just one 
of the ‘attractions’ at the Party. Hence the excitement of 
the hobbit-children. ‘G for Grand!’ they shouted, and the 
old man smiled. They knew him by sight, though he only 
appeared in Hobbiton occasionally and never stopped long; 
but neither they nor any but the oldest of their elders had 
seen one of his firework displays — they now belonged to a 
legendary past. 

When the old man, helped by Bilbo and some dwarves, 
had finished unloading, Bilbo gave a few pennies away; but 


A LONG-EXPECTED PARTY 33 


not a single squib or cracker was forthcoming, to the dis- 
appointment of the onlookers. 

‘Run away now!’ said Gandalf. “You will get plenty when 
the time comes.’ Then he disappeared inside with Bilbo, and 
the door was shut. The young hobbits stared at the door in 
vain for a while, and then made off, feeling that the day of 
the party would never come. 


Inside Bag End, Bilbo and Gandalf were sitting at the open 
window of a small room looking out west on to the garden. 
The late afternoon was bright and peaceful. The flowers 
glowed red and golden: snap-dragons and sunflowers, and 
nasturtians trailing all over the turf walls and peeping in at 
the round windows. 

‘How bright your garden looks!’ said Gandalf. 

‘Yes,’ said Bilbo. ‘I am very fond indeed of it, and of all 
the dear old Shire; but I think I need a holiday.’ 

“You mean to go on with your plan then?’ 

‘I do. I made up my mind months ago, and I haven’t 
changed it.’ 

‘Very well. It is no good saying any more. Stick to your 
plan — your whole plan, mind — and I hope it will turn out 
for the best, for you, and for all of us.’ 

‘I hope so. Anyway I mean to enjoy myself on Thursday, 
and have my little joke.’ 

‘Who will laugh, I wonder?’ said Gandalf, shaking his head. 

‘We shall see,’ said Bilbo. 


The next day more carts rolled up the Hill, and still more 
carts. There might have been some grumbling about ‘dealing 
locally’, but that very week orders began to pour out of Bag 
End for every kind of provision, commodity, or luxury that 
could be obtained in Hobbiton or Bywater or anywhere in 
the neighbourhood. People became enthusiastic; and they 
began to tick off the days on the calendar; and they watched 
eagerly for the postman, hoping for invitations. 

Before long the invitations began pouring out, and the 


34 THE FELLOWSHIP OF THE RING 


Hobbiton post-office was blocked, and the Bywater post- 
office was snowed under, and voluntary assistant postmen 
were called for. There was a constant stream of them going 
up the Hill, carrying hundreds of polite variations on Thank 
you, I shall certainly come. 

A notice appeared on the gate at Bag End: NO ADMIT- 
TANCE EXCEPT ON PARTY BUSINESS. Even those who had, 
or pretended to have Party Business were seldom allowed 
inside. Bilbo was busy: writing invitations, ticking off 
answers, packing up presents, and making some private 
preparations of his own. From the time of Gandalf’s arrival 
he remained hidden from view. 

One morning the hobbits woke to find the large field, south 
of Bilbo’s front door, covered with ropes and poles for tents 
and pavilions. A special entrance was cut into the bank 
leading to the road, and wide steps and a large white gate 
were built there. The three hobbit-families of Bagshot Row, 
adjoining the field, were intensely interested and generally 
envied. Old Gaffer Gamgee stopped even pretending to work 
in his garden. 

The tents began to go up. There was a specially large 
pavilion, so big that the tree that grew in the field was right 
inside it, and stood proudly near one end, at the head of 
the chief table. Lanterns were hung on all its branches. 
More promising still (to the hobbits’ mind): an enormous 
open-air kitchen was erected in the north corner of the field. 
A draught of cooks, from every inn and eating-house for 
miles around, arrived to supplement the dwarves and other 
odd folk that were quartered at Bag End. Excitement rose to 
its height. 

Then the weather clouded over. That was on Wednesday 
the eve of the Party. Anxiety was intense. Then Thursday, 
September the 22nd, actually dawned. The sun got up, the 
clouds vanished, flags were unfurled and the fun began. 

Bilbo Baggins called it a party, but it was really a variety 
of entertainments rolled into one. Practically everybody living 
near was invited. A very few were overlooked by accident, 


A LONG-EXPECTED PARTY 35 


but as they turned up all the same, that did not matter. Many 
people from other parts of the Shire were also asked; and 
there were even a few from outside the borders. Bilbo met 
the guests (and additions) at the new white gate in person. 
He gave away presents to all and sundry — the latter were 
those who went out again by a back way and came in again 
by the gate. Hobbits give presents to other people on their 
own birthdays. Not very expensive ones, as a rule, and not 
so lavishly as on this occasion; but it was not a bad system. 
Actually in Hobbiton and Bywater every day in the year was 
somebody’s birthday, so that every hobbit in those parts had 
a fair chance of at least one present at least once a week. But 
they never got tired of them. 

On this occasion the presents were unusually good. The 
hobbit-children were so excited that for a while they almost 
forgot about eating. There were toys the like of which they 
had never seen before, all beautiful and some obviously magi- 
cal. Many of them had indeed been ordered a year before, 
and had come all the way from the Mountain and from Dale, 
and were of real dwarf-make. 

When every guest had been welcomed and was finally 
inside the gate, there were songs, dances, music, games, and, 
of course, food and drink. There were three official meals: 
lunch, tea, and dinner (or supper). But lunch and tea were 
marked chiefly by the fact that at those times all the guests 
were sitting down and eating together. At other times there 
were merely lots of people eating and drinking — continuously 
from elevenses until six-thirty, when the fireworks started. 

The fireworks were by Gandalf: they were not only brought 
by him, but designed and made by him; and the special 
effects, set pieces, and flights of rockets were let off by 
him. But there was also a generous distribution of squibs, 
crackers, backarappers, sparklers, torches, dwarf-candles, elf- 
fountains, goblin-barkers and thunder-claps. They were all 
superb. The art of Gandalf improved with age. 

There were rockets like a flight of scintillating birds singing 
with sweet voices. There were green trees with trunks of dark 


36 THE FELLOWSHIP OF THE RING 


smoke: their leaves opened like a whole spring unfolding in a 
moment, and their shining branches dropped glowing flowers 
down upon the astonished hobbits, disappearing with a sweet 
scent just before they touched their upturned faces. There 
were fountains of butterflies that flew glittering into the trees; 
there were pillars of coloured fires that rose and turned into 
eagles, or sailing ships, or a phalanx of flying swans; there 
was a red thunderstorm and a shower of yellow rain; there 
was a forest of silver spears that sprang suddenly into the air 
with a yell like an embattled army, and came down again into 
the Water with a hiss like a hundred hot snakes. And there 
was also one last surprise, in honour of Bilbo, and it startled 
the hobbits exceedingly, as Gandalf intended. The lights went 
out. A great smoke went up. It shaped itself like a mountain 
seen in the distance, and began to glow at the summit. It 
spouted green and scarlet flames. Out flew a red-golden 
dragon — not life-size, but terribly life-like: fire came from his 
jaws, his eyes glared down; there was a roar, and he whizzed 
three times over the heads of the crowd. They all ducked, 
and many fell flat on their faces. ‘The dragon passed like an 
express train, turned a somersault, and burst over Bywater 
with a deafening explosion. 

“That is the signal for supper!’ said Bilbo. The pain and 
alarm vanished at once, and the prostrate hobbits leaped to 
their feet. There was a splendid supper for everyone; for 
everyone, that is, except those invited to the special family 
dinner-party. This was held in the great pavilion with the 
tree. The invitations were limited to twelve dozen (a number 
also called by the hobbits one Gross, though the word was 
not considered proper to use of people); and the guests were 
selected from all the families to which Bilbo and Frodo were 
related, with the addition of a few special unrelated friends 
(such as Gandalf). Many young hobbits were included, and 
present by parental permission; for hobbits were easy-going 
with their children in the matter of sitting up late, especially 
when there was a chance of getting them a free meal. Bringing 
up young hobbits took a lot of provender. 


A LONG-EXPECTED PARTY 37 


There were many Bagginses and Boffins, and also many 
Tooks and Brandybucks; there were various Grubbs (re- 
lations of Bilbo Baggins’ grandmother), and various Chubbs 
(connexions of his Took grandfather); and a selection of 
Burrowses, Bolgers, Bracegirdles, Brockhouses, Goodbodies, 
Hornblowers and Proudfoots. Some of these were only very 
distantly connected with Bilbo, and some had hardly ever 
been in Hobbiton before, as they lived in remote corners of 
the Shire. The Sackville-Bagginses were not forgotten. Otho 
and his wife Lobelia were present. They disliked Bilbo and 
detested Frodo, but so magnificent was the invitation card, 
written in golden ink, that they had felt it was impossible to 
refuse. Besides, their cousin, Bilbo, had been specializing in 
food for many years and his table had a high reputation. 

All the one hundred and forty-four guests expected a pleas- 
ant feast; though they rather dreaded the after-dinner speech 
of their host (an inevitable item). He was liable to drag in bits 
of what he called poetry; and sometimes, after a glass or 
two, would allude to the absurd adventures of his mysterious 
journey. The guests were not disappointed: they had a very 
pleasant feast, in fact an engrossing entertainment: rich, 
abundant, varied, and prolonged. The purchase of provisions 
fell almost to nothing throughout the district in the ensuing 
weeks; but as Bilbo’s catering had depleted the stocks of most 
of the stores, cellars and warehouses for miles around, that 
did not matter much. 

After the feast (more or less) came the Speech. Most of 
the company were, however, now in a tolerant mood, at that 
delightful stage which they called ‘filling up the corners’. 
They were sipping their favourite drinks, and nibbling at their 
favourite dainties, and their fears were forgotten. They were 
prepared to listen to anything, and to cheer at every full stop. 

My dear People, began Bilbo, rising in his place. ‘Hear! 
Hear! Hear!’ they shouted, and kept on repeating it in chorus, 
seeming reluctant to follow their own advice. Bilbo left his 
place and went and stood on a chair under the illuminated 
tree. The light of the lanterns fell on his beaming face; the 


38 THE FELLOWSHIP OF THE RING 


golden buttons shone on his embroidered silk waistcoat. They 
could all see him standing, waving one hand in the air, the 
other was in his trouser-pocket. 

My dear Bagginses and Boffins, he began again; and my 
dear Tooks and Brandybucks, and Grubbs, and Chubbs, and 
Burrowses, and Hornblowers, and Bolgers, Bracegirdles, Good- 
bodies, Brockhouses and Proudfoots. ‘ProudFEET!’ shouted an 
elderly hobbit from the back of the pavilion. His name, of 
course, was Proudfoot, and well merited; his feet were large, 
exceptionally furry, and both were on the table. 

Proudfoots, repeated Bilbo. Also my good Sackville-Bagginses 
that I welcome back at last to Bag End. Today is my one hundred 
and eleventh birthday: I am eleventy-one today! ‘Hurray! Hur- 
ray! Many Happy Returns!’ they shouted, and they ham- 
mered joyously on the tables. Bilbo was doing splendidly. 
This was the sort of stuff they liked: short and obvious. 

I hope you are all enjoying yourselves as much as I am. Deaf- 
ening cheers. Cries of Yes (and No). Noises of trumpets and 
horns, pipes and flutes, and other musical instruments. There 
were, as has been said, many young hobbits present. Hun- 
dreds of musical crackers had been pulled. Most of them 
bore the mark DALE on them; which did not convey much to 
most of the hobbits, but they all agreed they were marvellous 
crackers. They contained instruments, small, but of perfect 
make and enchanting tones. Indeed, in one corner some of 
the young Tooks and Brandybucks, supposing Uncle Bilbo 
to have finished (since he had plainly said all that was neces- 
sary), now got up an impromptu orchestra, and began a 
merry dance-tune. Master Everard Took and Miss Melilot 
Brandybuck got on a table and with bells in their hands 
began to dance the Springle-ring: a pretty dance, but rather 
vigorous. 

But Bilbo had not finished. Seizing a horn from a youngster 
nearby, he blew three loud hoots. The noise subsided. J shall 
not keep you long, he cried. Cheers from all the assembly. J 
have called you all together for a Purpose. Something in the 
way that he said this made an impression. There was almost 


A LONG-EXPECTED PARTY 39 


silence, and one or two of the Tooks pricked up their ears. 

Indeed, for Three Purposes! First of all, to tell you that I am 
immensely fond of you all, and that eleventy-one years is too 
short a time to live among such excellent and admirable hobbits. 
Tremendous outburst of approval. 

I don’t know half of you half as well as I should like; and I 
like less than half of you half as well as you deserve. ‘This was 
unexpected and rather difficult. There was some scattered 
clapping, but most of them were trying to work it out and 
see if it came to a compliment. 

Secondly, to celebrate my birthday. Cheers again. I should 
say: OUR birthday. For it 1s, of course, also the birthday of my 
heir and nephew, Frodo. He comes of age and into his inheritance 
today. Some perfunctory clapping by the elders; and some 
loud shouts of ‘Frodo! Frodo! Jolly old Frodo,’ from the 
juniors. The Sackville-Bagginses scowled, and wondered 
what was meant by ‘coming into his inheritance’. 

Together we score one hundred and forty-four. Your numbers 
were chosen to fit this remarkable total: One Gross, if I may use 
the expression. No cheers. This was ridiculous. Many of the 
guests, and especially the Sackville-Bagginses, were insulted, 
feeling sure they had only been asked to fill up the required 
number, like goods in a package. ‘One Gross, indeed! Vulgar 
expression.’ 

It is also, tf I may be allowed to refer to ancient history, the 
anniversary of my arrival by barrel at Esgaroth on the Long 
Lake; though the fact that it was my birthday slipped my memory 
on that occasion. I was only fifty-one then, and birthdays did not 
seem so important. The banquet was very splendid, however, 
though I had a bad cold at the time, I remember, and could only 
say ‘thag you very buch’. I now repeat it more correctly: Thank 
you very much for coming to my little party. Obstinate silence. 
They all feared that a song or some poetry was now immi- 
nent; and they were getting bored. Why couldn’t he stop 
talking and let them drink his health? But Bilbo did not sing 
or recite. He paused for a moment. 

Thirdly and finally, he said, I wish to make an 


40 THE FELLOWSHIP OF THE RING 


ANNOUNCEMENT. He spoke this last word so loudly and 
suddenly that everyone sat up who still could. I regret to 
announce that — though, as I said, eleventy-one years 1s far too 
short a time to spend among you — this 1s the END. I am going. 
Iam leaving NOW. GOOD-BYE! 


He stepped down and vanished. There was a blinding flash 
of light, and the guests all blinked. When they opened their 
eyes Bilbo was nowhere to be seen. One hundred and forty- 
four flabbergasted hobbits sat back speechless. Old Odo 
Proudfoot removed his feet from the table and stamped. 
Then there was a dead silence, until suddenly, after several 
deep breaths, every Baggins, Boffin, Took, Brandybuck, 
Grubb, Chubb, Burrows, Bolger, Bracegirdle, Brockhouse, 
Goodbody, Hornblower, and Proudfoot began to talk at once. 

It was generally agreed that the joke was in very bad taste, 
and more food and drink were needed to cure the guests of 
shock and annoyance. ‘He’s mad. I always said so,’ was 
probably the most popular comment. Even the Tooks (with 
a few exceptions) thought Bilbo’s behaviour was absurd. For 
the moment most of them took it for granted that his 
disappearance was nothing more than a ridiculous prank. 

But old Rory Brandybuck was not so sure. Neither age nor 
an enormous dinner had clouded his wits, and he said to his 
daughter-in-law, Esmeralda: “There’s something fishy in this, 
my dear! I believe that mad Baggins is off again. Silly old 
fool. But why worry? He hasn’t taken the vittles with him.’ 
He called loudly to Frodo to send the wine round again. 

Frodo was the only one present who had said nothing. For 
some time he had sat silent beside Bilbo’s empty chair, and 
ignored all remarks and questions. He had enjoyed the joke, 
of course, even though he had been in the know. He had 
difficulty in keeping from laughter at the indignant surprise 
of the guests. But at the same time he felt deeply troubled: 
he realized suddenly that he loved the old hobbit dearly. Most 
of the guests went on eating and drinking and discussing 
Bilbo Baggins’ oddities, past and present; but the Sackville- 


A LONG-EXPECTED PARTY AI 


Bagginses had already departed in wrath. Frodo did not want 
to have any more to do with the party. He gave orders for 
more wine to be served; then he got up and drained his own 
glass silently to the health of Bilbo, and slipped out of the 
pavilion. 


As for Bilbo Baggins, even while he was making his speech, 
he had been fingering the golden ring in his pocket: his magic 
ring that he had kept secret for so many years. As he stepped 
down he slipped it on his finger, and he was never seen by 
any hobbit in Hobbiton again. 

He walked briskly back to his hole, and stood for a moment 
listening with a smile to the din in the pavilion, and to the 
sounds of merrymaking in other parts of the field. Then he 
went in. He took off his party clothes, folded up and wrapped 
in tissue-paper his embroidered silk waistcoat, and put it 
away. Then he put on quickly some old untidy garments, 
and fastened round his waist a worn leather belt. On it he 
hung a short sword in a battered black-leather scabbard. 
From a locked drawer, smelling of moth-balls, he took 
out an old cloak and hood. They had been locked up as if 
they were very precious, but they were so patched and 
weatherstained that their original colour could hardly be 
guessed: it might have been dark green. They were rather too 
large for him. He then went into his study, and from a large 
strong-box took out a bundle wrapped in old cloths, and a 
leather-bound manuscript; and also a large bulky envelope. 
The book and bundle he stuffed into the top of a heavy bag 
that was standing there, already nearly full. Into the enve- 
lope he slipped his golden ring, and its fine chain, and then 
sealed it, and addressed it to Frodo. At first he put it on the 
mantelpiece, but suddenly he removed it and stuck it in his 
pocket. At that moment the door opened and Gandalf came 
quickly in. 

‘Hullo!’ said Bilbo. ‘I wondered if you would turn up.’ 

‘T am glad to find you visible,’ replied the wizard, sitting 
down in a chair, ‘I wanted to catch you and have a few 


42 THE FELLOWSHIP OF THE RING 


final words. I suppose you feel that everything has gone off 
splendidly and according to plan?’ 

‘Yes, I do,’ said Bilbo. “Though that flash was surprising: 
it quite startled me, let alone the others. A little addition of 
your own, I suppose?’ 

‘It was. You have wisely kept that ring secret all these years, 
and it seemed to me necessary to give your guests something 
else that would seem to explain your sudden vanishment.’ 

‘And would spoil my joke. You are an interfering old busy- 
body,’ laughed Bilbo, “but I expect you know best, as usual.’ 

‘I do — when I know anything. But I don’t feel too sure 
about this whole affair. It has now come to the final point. 
You have had your joke, and alarmed or offended most of 
your relations, and given the whole Shire something to talk 
about for nine days, or ninety-nine more likely. Are you going 
any further?’ 

“Yes, I am. I feel I need a holiday, a very long holiday, as 
Ihave told you before. Probably a permanent holiday: I don’t 
expect I shall return. In fact, I don’t mean to, and I have 
made all arrangements. 

‘Tam old, Gandalf. I don’t look it, but I am beginning 
to feel it in my heart of hearts. Well-preserved indeed!’ he 
snorted. ‘Why, I feel all thin, sort of stretched, if you know 
what I mean: like butter that has been scraped over too much 
bread. That can’t be right. I need a change, or something.’ 

Gandalf looked curiously and closely at him. ‘No, it does 
not seem right,’ he said thoughtfully. ‘No, after all I believe 
your plan is probably the best.’ 

‘Well, ?ve made up my mind, anyway. I want to see moun- 
tains again, Gandalf — mountains; and then find somewhere 
where I can rest. In peace and quiet, without a lot of relatives 
prying around, and a string of confounded visitors hanging 
on the bell. I might find somewhere where I can finish my 
book. I have thought of a nice ending for it: and he lived 
happily ever after to the end of his days.’ 

Gandalf laughed. ‘I hope he will. But nobody will read the 
book, however it ends.’ 


A LONG-EXPECTED PARTY 43 


‘Oh, they may, in years to come. Frodo has read some 
already, as far as it has gone. You’ll keep an eye on Frodo, 
won’t you?’ 

“Yes, I will — two eyes, as often as I can spare them.’ 

‘He would come with me, of course, if I asked him. In fact 
he offered to once, just before the party. But he does not 
really want to, yet. I want to see the wild country again before 
I die, and the Mountains; but he is still in love with the 
Shire, with woods and fields and little rivers. He ought to be 
comfortable here. I am leaving everything to him, of course, 
except a few oddments. I hope he will be happy, when he 
gets used to being on his own. It’s time he was his own master 
now.’ 

‘Everything?’ said Gandalf. “The ring as well? You agreed 
to that, you remember.’ 

‘Well, er, yes, I suppose so,’ stammered Bilbo. 

‘Where is it?’ 

‘In an envelope, if you must know,’ said Bilbo impatiently. 
“There on the mantelpiece. Well, no! Here it is in my 
pocket!’ He hesitated. ‘Isn’t that odd now?’ he said softly 
to himself. ‘Yet after all, why not? Why shouldn’t it stay 
there?’ 

Gandalf looked again very hard at Bilbo, and there was a 
gleam in his eyes. ‘I think, Bilbo,’ he said quietly, ‘I should 
leave it behind. Don’t you want to?’ 

‘Well yes — and no. Now it comes to it, I don’t like parting 
with it at all, I may say. And I don’t really see why I should. 
Why do you want me to?’ he asked, and a curious change 
came over his voice. It was sharp with suspicion and annoy- 
ance. ‘You are always badgering me about my ring; but you 
have never bothered me about the other things that I got on 
my journey.’ 

‘No, but I had to badger you,’ said Gandalf. ‘I wanted the 
truth. It was important. Magic rings are — well, magical; and 
they are rare and curious. I was professionally interested in 
your ring, you may say; and I still am. I should like to know 
where it is, if you go wandering again. Also I think you have 


44 THE FELLOWSHIP OF THE RING 


had it quite long enough. You won’t need it any more, Bilbo, 
unless I am quite mistaken.’ 

Bilbo flushed, and there was an angry light in his eyes. His 
kindly face grew hard. ‘Why not?’ he cried. ‘And what 
business is it of yours, anyway, to know what I do with my 
own things? It is my own. I found it. It came to me.’ 

‘Yes, yes,’ said Gandalf. ‘But there is no need to get angry.’ 

‘If I am it is your fault,’ said Bilbo. ‘It is mine, I tell you. 
My own. My Precious. Yes, my Precious.’ 

The wizard’s face remained grave and attentive, and only 
a flicker in his deep eyes showed that he was startled and 
indeed alarmed. ‘It has been called that before,’ he said, ‘but 
not by you.’ 

‘But I say it now. And why not? Even if Gollum said the 
same once. It’s not his now, but mine. And I shall keep it, I 
say.’ 

Gandalf stood up. He spoke sternly. ‘You will be a fool if 
you do, Bilbo,’ he said. “You make that clearer with every 
word you say. It has got far too much hold on you. Let it go! 
And then you can go yourself, and be free.’ 

‘Tll do as I choose and go as I please,’ said Bilbo obstinately. 

‘Now, now, my dear hobbit!’ said Gandalf. ‘All your long 
life we have been friends, and you owe me something. Come! 
Do as you promised: give it up!’ 

‘Well, if you want my ring yourself, say so!’ cried Bilbo. 
‘But you won’t get it. I won’t give my Precious away, I tell 
you.” His hand strayed to the hilt of his small sword. 

Gandalf’s eyes flashed. ‘It will be my turn to get angry 
soon,’ he said. ‘If you say that again, I shall. Then you will 
see Gandalf the Grey uncloaked.’ He took a step towards the 
hobbit, and he seemed to grow tall and menacing; his shadow 
filled the little room. 

Bilbo backed away to the wall, breathing hard, his hand 
clutching at his pocket. They stood for a while facing one 
another, and the air of the room tingled. Gandalf’s eyes 
remained bent on the hobbit. Slowly his hands relaxed, and 
he began to tremble. 


A LONG-EXPECTED PARTY 45 


‘I don’t know what has come over you, Gandalf,’ he said. 
“You have never been like this before. What is it all about? It 
is mine isn’t it? I found it, and Gollum would have killed me, 
if I hadn’t kept it. ’m not a thief, whatever he said.’ 

‘I have never called you one,’ Gandalf answered. ‘And I 
am not one either. I am not trying to rob you, but to help 
you. I wish you would trust me, as you used.’ He turned 
away, and the shadow passed. He seemed to dwindle again 
to an old grey man, bent and troubled. 

Bilbo drew his hand over his eyes. ‘I am sorry,’ he said. 
‘But I felt so queer. And yet it would be a relief in a way not 
to be bothered with it any more. It has been so growing on 
my mind lately. Sometimes I have felt it was like an eye 
looking at me. And I am always wanting to put it on and 
disappear, don’t you know; or wondering if it is safe, and 
pulling it out to make sure. I tried locking it up, but I found 
I couldn’t rest without it in my pocket. I don’t know why. 
And I don’t seem able to make up my mind.’ 

“Then trust mine,’ said Gandalf. ‘It is quite made up. Go 
away and leave it behind. Stop possessing it. Give it to Frodo, 
and I will look after him.’ 

Bilbo stood for a moment tense and undecided. Presently 
he sighed. ‘All right,’ he said with an effort. ‘I will.’ Then he 
shrugged his shoulders, and smiled rather ruefully. ‘After all 
that’s what this party business was all about, really: to give 
away lots of birthday-presents, and somehow make it easier 
to give it away at the same time. It hasn’t made it any easier 
in the end, but it would be a pity to waste all my preparations. 
It would quite spoil the joke.’ 

‘Indeed it would take away the only point I ever saw in the 
affair,’ said Gandalf. 

‘Very well,’ said Bilbo, ‘it goes to Frodo with all the rest.’ 
He drew a deep breath. ‘And now I really must be starting, 
or somebody else will catch me. I have said good-bye, and I 
couldn’t bear to do it all over again.’ He picked up his bag 
and moved to the door. 

“You have still got the ring in your pocket,’ said the wizard. 


46 THE FELLOWSHIP OF THE RING 


‘Well, so I have!’ cried Bilbo. ‘And my will and all the other 
documents too. You had better take it and deliver it for me. 
That will be safest.’ 

‘No, don’t give the ring to me,’ said Gandalf. ‘Put it on the 
mantelpiece. It will be safe enough there, till Frodo comes. I 
shall wait for him.’ 

Bilbo took out the envelope, but just as he was about to set 
it by the clock, his hand jerked back, and the packet fell on 
the floor. Before he could pick it up, the wizard stooped and 
seized it and set it in its place. A spasm of anger passed 
swiftly over the hobbit’s face again. Suddenly it gave way to 
a look of relief and a laugh. 

‘Well, that’s that,’ he said. ‘Now I’m off!’ 

They went out into the hall. Bilbo chose his favourite stick 
from the stand; then he whistled. Three dwarves came out 
of different rooms where they had been busy. 

‘Is everything ready?’ asked Bilbo. ‘Everything packed and 
labelled?’ 

‘Everything,’ they answered. 

‘Well, let’s start then!’ He stepped out of the front-door. 

It was a fine night, and the black sky was dotted with stars. 
He looked up, sniffing the air. ‘What fun! What fun to be off 
again, off on the Road with dwarves! This is what I have 
really been longing for, for years! Good-bye!’ he said, looking 
at his old home and bowing to the door. ‘Good-bye, Gandalf!’ 

‘Good-bye, for the present, Bilbo. Take care of yourself! 
You are old enough, and perhaps wise enough.’ 

“Take care! I don’t care. Don’t you worry about me! I am 
as happy now as I have ever been, and that is saying a great 
deal. But the time has come. I am being swept off my feet at 
last,’ he added, and then in a low voice, as if to himself, he 
sang softly in the dark: 


The Road goes ever on and on 
Down from the door where it began. 
Now far ahead the Road has gone, 
And I must follow, if I can, 


A LONG-EXPECTED PARTY 47 


Pursuing it with eager feet, 
Until tt joins some larger way 
Where many paths and errands meet. 
And whither then? I cannot say. 


He paused, silent for a moment. Then without another word 
he turned away from the lights and voices in the field and 
tents, and followed by his three companions went round 
into his garden, and trotted down the long sloping path. He 
jumped over a low place in the hedge at the bottom, and took 
to the meadows, passing into the night like a rustle of wind 
in the grass. 

Gandalf remained for a while staring after him into the 
darkness. ‘Good-bye, my dear Bilbo — until our next meet- 
ing!’ he said softly and went back indoors. 


Frodo came in soon afterwards, and found him sitting in 
the dark, deep in thought. ‘Has he gone?” he asked. 

‘Yes,’ answered Gandalf, ‘he has gone at last.’ 

‘I wish — I mean, I hoped until this evening that it was only 
a joke,’ said Frodo. ‘But I knew in my heart that he really 
meant to go. He always used to joke about serious things. I 
wish I had come back sooner, just to see him off.’ 

‘T think really he preferred slipping off quietly in the end,’ 
said Gandalf. ‘Don’t be too troubled. He'll be all right — now. 
He left a packet for you. There it is!’ 

Frodo took the envelope from the mantelpiece, and glanced 
at it, but did not open it. 

‘You'll find his will and all the other documents in there, I 
think,’ said the wizard. ‘You are the master of Bag End now. 
And also, I fancy, you’ll find a golden ring.’ 

“The ring!’ exclaimed Frodo. ‘Has he left me that? I wonder 
why. Still, it may be useful.’ 

‘It may, and it may not,’ said Gandalf. ‘I should not make 
use of it, if I were you. But keep it secret, and keep it safe! 
Now I am going to bed.’ 

ok * ok 


48 THE FELLOWSHIP OF THE RING 


As master of Bag End Frodo felt it his painful duty to say 
good-bye to the guests. Rumours of strange events had by 
now spread all over the field, but Frodo would only say no 
doubt everything will be cleared up in the morning. About mid- 
night carriages came for the important folk. One by one 
they rolled away, filled with full but very unsatisfied hobbits. 
Gardeners came by arrangement, and removed in wheel- 
barrows those that had inadvertently remained behind. 

Night slowly passed. The sun rose. The hobbits rose rather 
later. Morning went on. People came and began (by orders) 
to clear away the pavilions and the tables and the chairs, and 
the spoons and knives and bottles and plates, and the lanterns, 
and the flowering shrubs in boxes, and the crumbs and 
cracker-paper, the forgotten bags and gloves and handker- 
chiefs, and the uneaten food (a very small item). Then a 
number of other people came (without orders): Bagginses, 
and Boffins, and Bolgers, and Tooks, and other guests that 
lived or were staying near. By mid-day, when even the best- 
fed were out and about again, there was a large crowd at Bag 
End, uninvited but not unexpected. 

Frodo was waiting on the step, smiling, but looking rather 
tired and worried. He welcomed all the callers, but he had 
not much more to say than before. His reply to all inquiries 
was simply this: ‘Mr. Bilbo Baggins has gone away; as far as 
I know, for good.’ Some of the visitors he invited to come 
inside, as Bilbo had left ‘messages’ for them. 

Inside in the hall there was piled a large assortment of 
packages and parcels and small articles of furniture. On every 
item there was a label tied. There were several labels of this 
sort: 

For ADELARD TOOK, for his VERY OWN, from Bilbo; on 
an umbrella. Adelard had carried off many unlabelled ones. 

For DORA BAGGINS in memory of a LONG correspon- 
dence, with love from Bilbo; on a large waste-paper basket. 
Dora was Drogo’s sister and the eldest surviving female rela- 
tive of Bilbo and Frodo; she was ninety-nine, and had written 
reams of good advice for more than half a century. 


A LONG-EXPECTED PARTY 49 


For MILO BURROWS, hoping it will be useful, from B.B.; 
on a gold pen and ink-bottle. Milo never answered letters. 

For ANGELICA’S use, from Uncle Bilbo; on a round convex 
mirror. She was a young Baggins, and too obviously con- 
sidered her face shapely. 

For the collection of HUGO BRACEGIRDLE, from a con- 
tributor; on an (empty) book-case. Hugo was a great borrower 
of books, and worse than usual at returning them. 

For LOBELIA SACKVILLE-BAGGINS, as a PRESENT; 
on a case of silver spoons. Bilbo believed that she had 
acquired a good many of his spoons, while he was away on 
his former journey. Lobelia knew that quite well. When she 
arrived later in the day, she took the point at once, but she 
also took the spoons. 


This is only a small selection of the assembled presents. 
Bilbo’s residence had got rather cluttered up with things in 
the course of his long life. It was a tendency of hobbit-holes 
to get cluttered up: for which the custom of giving so many 
birthday-presents was largely responsible. Not, of course, 
that the birthday-presents were always new; there were one 
or two old mathoms of forgotten uses that had circulated all 
around the district; but Bilbo had usually given new presents, 
and kept those that he received. The old hole was now being 
cleared a little. 

Every one of the various parting gifts had labels, written 
out personally by Bilbo, and several had some point, or some 
joke. But, of course, most of the things were given where 
they would be wanted and welcome. The poorer hobbits, and 
especially those of Bagshot Row, did very well. Old Gaffer 
Gamgee got two sacks of potatoes, a new spade, a woollen 
waistcoat, and a bottle of ointment for creaking joints. Old 
Rory Brandybuck, in return for much hospitality, got a dozen 
bottles of Old Winyards: a strong red wine from the South- 
farthing, and now quite mature, as it had been laid down by 
Bilbo’s father. Rory quite forgave Bilbo, and voted him a 
capital fellow after the first bottle. 


50 THE FELLOWSHIP OF THE RING 


There was plenty of everything left for Frodo. And, of 
course, all the chief treasures, as well as the books, pictures, 
and more than enough furniture, were left in his possession. 
There was, however, no sign nor mention of money or jewel- 
lery: not a penny-piece or a glass bead was given away. 


Frodo had a very trying time that afternoon. A false rumour 
that the whole household was being distributed free spread 
like wildfire; and before long the place was packed with 
people who had no business there, but could not be kept out. 
Labels got torn off and mixed, and quarrels broke out. Some 
people tried to do swaps and deals in the hall; and others 
tried to make off with minor items not addressed to them, or 
with anything that seemed unwanted or unwatched. The road 
to the gate was blocked with barrows and handcarts. 

In the middle of the commotion the Sackville-Bagginses 
arrived. Frodo had retired for a while and left his friend 
Merry Brandybuck to keep an eye on things. When Otho 
loudly demanded to see Frodo, Merry bowed politely. 

‘He is indisposed,’ he said. ‘He is resting.’ 

‘Hiding, you mean,’ said Lobelia. ‘Anyway we want to see 
him and we mean to see him. Just go and tell him so!’ 

Merry left them a long while in the hall, and they had time 
to discover their parting gift of spoons. It did not improve 
their tempers. Eventually they were shown into the study. 
Frodo was sitting at a table with a lot of papers in front of 
him. He looked indisposed — to see Sackville-Bagginses at 
any rate; and he stood up, fidgeting with something in his 
pocket. But he spoke quite politely. 

The Sackville-Bagginses were rather offensive. They began 
by offering him bad bargain-prices (as between friends) for 
various valuable and unlabelled things. When Frodo replied 
that only the things specially directed by Bilbo were being 
given away, they said the whole affair was very fishy. 

‘Only one thing is clear to me,’ said Otho, ‘and that is that 
you are doing exceedingly well out of it. I insist on seeing 
the will.’ 


A LONG-EXPECTED PARTY SI 


Otho would have been Bilbo’s heir, but for the adoption 
of Frodo. He read the will carefully and snorted. It was, 
unfortunately, very clear and correct (according to the legal 
customs of hobbits, which demand among other things seven 
signatures of witnesses in red ink). 

‘Foiled again!’ he said to his wife. ‘And after waiting szxty 
years. Spoons? Fiddlesticks!’ He snapped his fingers under 
Frodo’s nose and stumped off. But Lobelia was not so easily 
got rid of. A little later Frodo came out of the study to see 
how things were going on, and found her still about the place, 
investigating nooks and corners, and tapping the floors. He 
escorted her firmly off the premises, after he had relieved 
her of several small (but rather valuable) articles that had 
somehow fallen inside her umbrella. Her face looked as if she 
was in the throes of thinking out a really crushing parting 
remark; but all she found to say, turning round on the step, 
was: 

‘You'll live to regret it, young fellow! Why didn’t you go 
too? You don’t belong here; you’re no Baggins — you — you’re 
a Brandybuck!’ 

‘Did you hear that, Merry? That was an insult, if you like,’ 
said Frodo as he shut the door on her. 

‘It was a compliment,’ said Merry Brandybuck, ‘and so, of 
course, not true.’ 


Then they went round the hole, and evicted three young 
hobbits (two Boffins and a Bolger) who were knocking holes 
in the walls of one of the cellars. Frodo also had a tussle with 
young Sancho Proudfoot (old Odo Proudfoot’s grandson), 
who had begun an excavation in the larger pantry, where he 
thought there was an echo. The legend of Bilbo’s gold excited 
both curiosity and hope; for legendary gold (mysteriously 
obtained, if not positively ill-gotten), is, as everyone knows, 
anyone’s for the finding — unless the search is interrupted. 

When he had overcome Sancho and pushed him out, 
Frodo collapsed on a chair in the hall. ‘It’s time to close the 
shop, Merry,’ he said. ‘Lock the door, and don’t open it to 


52 THE FELLOWSHIP OF THE RING 


anyone today, not even if they bring a battering ram.’ Then 
he went to revive himself with a belated cup of tea. 

He had hardly sat down, when there came a soft knock at 
the front-door. ‘Lobelia again most likely,’ he thought. ‘She 
must have thought of something really nasty, and have come 
back again to say it. It can wait.’ 

He went on with his tea. The knock was repeated, much 
louder, but he took no notice. Suddenly the wizard’s head 
appeared at the window. 

‘If you don’t let me in, Frodo, I shall blow your door right 
down your hole and out through the hill,’ he said. 

‘My dear Gandalf! Half a minute!’ cried Frodo, running 
out of the room to the door. ‘Come in! Come in! I thought it 
was Lobelia.’ 

“Then I forgive you. But I saw her some time ago, driving 
a pony-trap towards Bywater with a face that would have 
curdled new milk.’ 

‘She had already nearly curdled me. Honestly, I nearly 
tried on Bilbo’s ring. I longed to disappear.’ 

‘Don’t do that!’ said Gandalf, sitting down. ‘Do be careful 
of that ring, Frodo! In fact, it is partly about that that I have 
come to say a last word.’ 

‘Well, what about it?’ 

‘What do you know already?’ 

‘Only what Bilbo told me. I have heard his story: how he 
found it, and how he used it: on his journey, I mean.’ 

‘Which story, I wonder,’ said Gandalf. 

‘Oh, not what he told the dwarves and put in his book,’ 
said Frodo. ‘He told me the true story soon after I came 
to live here. He said you had pestered him till he told 
you, so I had better know too. “No secrets between us, 
Frodo,” he said; “but they are not to go any further. It’s mine 
anyway.’ 

“That’s interesting,’ said Gandalf. ‘Well, what did you think 
of it all?’ 

‘If you mean, inventing all that about a “‘present’’, well, I 
thought the true story much more likely, and I couldn’t see 


A LONG-EXPECTED PARTY 53 


the point of altering it at all. It was very unlike Bilbo to do 
so, anyway; and I thought it rather odd.’ 

‘So did I. But odd things may happen to people that have 
such treasures — if they use them. Let it be a warning to you 
to be very careful with it. It may have other powers than just 
making you vanish when you wish to.’ 

‘I don’t understand,’ said Frodo. 

‘Neither do I,’ answered the wizard. ‘I have merely begun 
to wonder about the ring, especially since last night. No need 
to worry. But if you take my advice you will use it very 
seldom, or not at all. At least I beg you not to use it in any 
way that will cause talk or rouse suspicion. I say again: keep 
it safe, and keep it secret!’ 

“You are very mysterious! What are you afraid of ?’ 

‘I am not certain, so I will say no more. I may be able to 
tell you something when I come back. I am going off at once: 
so this is good-bye for the present.’ He got up. 

‘At once!’ cried Frodo. ‘Why, I thought you were staying 
on for at least a week. I was looking forward to your help.’ 

‘I did mean to — but I have had to change my mind. I may 
be away for a good while; but I'll come and see you again, as 
soon as I can. Expect me when you see me! I shall slip in 
quietly. I shan’t often be visiting the Shire openly again. I 
find that I have become rather unpopular. They say I am a 
nuisance and a disturber of the peace. Some people are actu- 
ally accusing me of spiriting Bilbo away, or worse. If you 
want to know, there is supposed to be a plot between you 
and me to get hold of his wealth.’ 

‘Some people!’ exclaimed Frodo. ‘You mean Otho and 
Lobelia. How abominable! I would give them Bag End and 
everything else, if I could get Bilbo back and go off tramping 
in the country with him. I love the Shire. But I begin to wish, 
somehow, that I had gone too. I wonder if I shall ever see 
him again.’ 

‘So do I,’ said Gandalf. ‘And I wonder many other things. 
Good-bye now! Take care of yourself! Look out for me, 
especially at unlikely times! Good-bye!’ 


54 THE FELLOWSHIP OF THE RING 


Frodo saw him to the door. He gave a final wave of his 
hand, and walked off at a surprising pace; but Frodo thought 
the old wizard looked unusually bent, almost as if he was 
carrying a great weight. The evening was closing in, and his 
cloaked figure quickly vanished into the twilight. Frodo did 
not see him again for a long time. 


Chapter 2 


THE SHADOW OF THE PAST 


The talk did not die down in nine or even ninety-nine days. 
The second disappearance of Mr. Bilbo Baggins was dis- 
cussed in Hobbiton, and indeed all over the Shire, for a year 
and a day, and was remembered much longer than that. It 
became a fireside-story for young hobbits; and eventually 
Mad Baggins, who used to vanish with a bang and a flash 
and reappear with bags of jewels and gold, became a favourite 
character of legend and lived on long after all the true events 
were forgotten. 

But in the meantime, the general opinion in the neighbour- 
hood was that Bilbo, who had always been rather cracked, 
had at last gone quite mad, and had run off into the Blue. 
There he had undoubtedly fallen into a pool or a river and 
come to a tragic, but hardly an untimely, end. The blame 
was mostly laid on Gandalf. 

‘If only that dratted wizard will leave young Frodo alone, 
perhaps he’ll settle down and grow some hobbit-sense,’ they 
said. And to all appearance the wizard did leave Frodo alone, 
and he did settle down, but the growth of hobbit-sense was 
not very noticeable. Indeed, he at once began to carry on 
Bilbo’s reputation for oddity. He refused to go into mourning; 
and the next year he gave a party in honour of Bilbo’s 
hundred-and-twelfth birthday, which he called a Hundred- 
weight Feast. But that was short of the mark, for twenty 
guests were invited and there were several meals at which it 
snowed food and rained drink, as hobbits say. 

Some people were rather shocked; but Frodo kept up the 
custom of giving Bilbo’s Birthday Party year after year until 
they got used to it. He said that he did not think Bilbo was 


56 THE FELLOWSHIP OF THE RING 


dead. When they asked: ‘Where is he then?’ he shrugged his 
shoulders. 

He lived alone, as Bilbo had done; but he had a good 
many friends, especially among the younger hobbits (mostly 
descendants of the Old Took) who had as children been fond 
of Bilbo and often in and out of Bag End. Folco Boffin and 
Fredegar Bolger were two of these; but his closest friends 
were Peregrin Took (usually called Pippin), and Merry 
Brandybuck (his real name was Meriadoc, but that was 
seldom remembered). Frodo went tramping over the Shire 
with them; but more often he wandered by himself, and to 
the amazement of sensible folk he was sometimes seen far 
from home walking in the hills and woods under the starlight. 
Merry and Pippin suspected that he visited the Elves at times, 
as Bilbo had done. 


As time went on, people began to notice that Frodo also 
showed signs of good ‘preservation’: outwardly he retained 
the appearance of a robust and energetic hobbit just out of 
his tweens. ‘Some folk have all the luck,’ they said; but it was 
not until Frodo approached the usually more sober age of 
fifty that they began to think it queer. 

Frodo himself, after the first shock, found that being his own 
master and the Mr. Baggins of Bag End was rather pleasant. 
For some years he was quite happy and did not worry much 
about the future. But half unknown to himself the regret that 
he had not gone with Bilbo was steadily growing. He found 
himself wondering at times, especially in the autumn, about 
the wild lands, and strange visions of mountains that he had 
never seen came into his dreams. He began to say to himself: 
‘Perhaps I shall cross the River myself one day.’ To which 
the other half of his mind always replied: ‘Not yet.’ 

So it went on, until his forties were running out, and his 
fiftieth birthday was drawing near: fifty was a number that 
he felt was somehow significant (or ominous); it was at any 
rate at that age that adventure had suddenly befallen Bilbo. 
Frodo began to feel restless, and the old paths seemed too 


THE SHADOW OF THE PAST 57 


well-trodden. He looked at maps, and wondered what lay 
beyond their edges: maps made in the Shire showed mostly 
white spaces beyond its borders. He took to wandering 
further afield and more often by himself; and Merry and 
his other friends watched him anxiously. Often he was seen 
walking and talking with the strange wayfarers that began at 
this time to appear in the Shire. 


There were rumours of strange things happening in the 
world outside; and as Gandalf had not at that time appeared or 
sent any message for several years, Frodo gathered all the news 
he could. Elves, who seldom walked in the Shire, could now 
be seen passing westward through the woods in the evening, 
passing and not returning; but they were leaving Middle-earth 
and were no longer concerned with its troubles. There were, 
however, dwarves on the road in unusual numbers. The 
ancient East-West Road ran through the Shire to its end at the 
Grey Havens, and dwarves had always used it on their way to 
their mines in the Blue Mountains. They were the hobbits’ 
chief source of news from distant parts —if they wanted any: as 
a rule dwarves said little and hobbits asked no more. But now 
Frodo often met strange dwarves of far countries, seeking 
refuge in the West. They were troubled, and some spoke in 
whispers of the Enemy and of the Land of Mordor. 

That name the hobbits only knew in legends of the dark 
past, like a shadow in the background of their memories; but 
it was ominous and disquieting. It seemed that the evil power 
in Mirkwood had been driven out by the White Council 
only to reappear in greater strength in the old strongholds of 
Mordor. The Dark Tower had been rebuilt, it was said. From 
there the power was spreading far and wide, and away far 
east and south there were wars and growing fear. Orcs were 
multiplying again in the mountains. Trolls were abroad, no 
longer dull-witted, but cunning and armed with dreadful 
weapons. And there were murmured hints of creatures more 
terrible than all these, but they had no name. 

ok k ok 


58 THE FELLOWSHIP OF THE RING 


Little of all this, of course, reached the ears of ordinary 
hobbits. But even the deafest and most stay-at-home began 
to hear queer tales; and those whose business took them to the 
borders saw strange things. The conversation in The Green 
Dragon at Bywater, one evening in the spring of Frodo’s 
fiftieth year, showed that even in the comfortable heart of the 
Shire rumours had been heard, though most hobbits still 
laughed at them. 

Sam Gamgee was sitting in one corner near the fire, and 
opposite him was Ted Sandyman, the miller’s son; and there 
were various other rustic hobbits listening to their talk. 

‘Queer things you do hear these days, to be sure,’ said Sam. 

‘Ah,’ said Ted, ‘you do, if you listen. But I can hear fireside- 
tales and children’s stories at home, if I want to.’ 

‘No doubt you can,’ retorted Sam, ‘and I daresay there’s 
more truth in some of them than you reckon. Who invented 
the stories anyway? Take dragons now.’ 

‘No thank ’ee,’ said Ted, ‘I won’t. I heard tell of them 
when I was a youngster, but there’s no call to believe in them 
now. There’s only one Dragon in Bywater, and that’s Green,’ 
he said, getting a general laugh. 

‘All right,’ said Sam, laughing with the rest. ‘But what 
about these Tree-men, these giants, as you might call them? 
They do say that one bigger than a tree was seen up away 
beyond the North Moors not long back.’ 

‘Who's they?’ 

‘My cousin Hal for one. He works for Mr. Boffin at 
Overhill and goes up to the Northfarthing for the hunting. 
He saw one.’ 

‘Says he did, perhaps. Your Hal’s always saying he’s seen 
things; and maybe he sees things that ain’t there.’ 

‘But this one was as big as an elm tree, and walking — 
walking seven yards to a stride, if it was an inch.’ 

“Then I bet it wasn’t an inch. What he saw was an elm tree, 
as like as not.’ 

‘But this one was walking, I tell you; and there ain’t no elm 
tree on the North Moors.’ 


THE SHADOW OF THE PAST 59 


“Then Hal can’t have seen one,’ said Ted. There was some 
laughing and clapping: the audience seemed to think that 
Ted had scored a point. 

‘All the same,’ said Sam, ‘you can’t deny that others besides 
our Halfast have seen queer folk crossing the Shire — crossing 
it, mind you: there are more that are turned back at the 
borders. The Bounders have never been so busy before. 

‘And I’ve heard tell that Elves are moving west. They do 
say they are going to the harbours, out away beyond the 
White Towers.’ Sam waved his arm vaguely: neither he nor 
any of them knew how far it was to the Sea, past the old 
towers beyond the western borders of the Shire. But it was 
an old tradition that away over there stood the Grey Havens, 
from which at times elven-ships set sail, never to return. 

“They are sailing, sailing, sailing over the Sea, they are 
going into the West and leaving us,’ said Sam, half chanting 
the words, shaking his head sadly and solemnly. But Ted 
laughed. 

‘Well, that isn’t anything new, if you believe the old tales. 
And I don’t see what it matters to me or you. Let them sail! 
But I warrant you haven’t seen them doing it; nor anyone 
else in the Shire.’ 

‘Well, I don’t know,’ said Sam thoughtfully. He believed 
he had once seen an Elf in the woods, and still hoped to see 
more one day. Of all the legends that he had heard in his 
early years such fragments of tales and half-remembered 
stories about the Elves as the hobbits knew, had always moved 
him most deeply. “There are some, even in these parts, as 
know the Fair Folk and get news of them,’ he said. “There’s 
Mr. Baggins now, that I work for. He told me that they were 
sailing and he knows a bit about Elves. And old Mr. Bilbo knew 
more: many’s the talk I had with him when I was a little lad.’ 

‘Oh, they’re both cracked,’ said Ted. ‘Leastways old Bilbo 
was cracked, and Frodo’s cracking. If that’s where you get 
your news from, you'll never want for moonshine. Well, 
friends, Pm off home. Your good health!’ He drained his 
mug and went out noisily. 


60 THE FELLOWSHIP OF THE RING 


Sam sat silent and said no more. He had a good deal to 
think about. For one thing, there was a lot to do up in the 
Bag End garden, and he would have a busy day tomorrow, 
if the weather cleared. The grass was growing fast. But Sam 
had more on his mind than gardening. After a while he 
sighed, and got up and went out. 

It was early April and the sky was now clearing after heavy 
rain. The sun was down, and a cool pale evening was quietly 
fading into night. He walked home under the early stars 
through Hobbiton and up the Hill, whistling softly and 
thoughtfully. 


It was just at this time that Gandalf reappeared after his long 
absence. For three years after the Party he had been away. 
Then he paid Frodo a brief visit, and after taking a good look 
at him he went off again. During the next year or two he had 
turned up fairly often, coming unexpectedly after dusk, and 
going off without warning before sunrise. He would not 
discuss his own business and journeys, and seemed chiefly 
interested in small news about Frodo’s health and doings. 

Then suddenly his visits had ceased. It was over nine years 
since Frodo had seen or heard of him, and he had begun to 
think that the wizard would never return and had given up 
all interest in hobbits. But that evening, as Sam was walking 
home and twilight was fading, there came the once familiar 
tap on the study window. 

Frodo welcomed his old friend with surprise and great 
delight. They looked hard at one another. 

‘All well eh?’ said Gandalf. ‘You look the same as ever, 
Frodo!’ 

‘So do you,’ Frodo replied; but secretly he thought that 
Gandalf looked older and more careworn. He pressed him 
for news of himself and of the wide world, and soon they 
were deep in talk, and they stayed up far into the night. 


Next morning after a late breakfast, the wizard was sitting 
with Frodo by the open window of the study. A bright fire 


THE SHADOW OF THE PAST 61 


was on the hearth, but the sun was warm, and the wind was 
in the South. Everything looked fresh, and the new green of 
spring was shimmering in the fields and on the tips of the 
trees’ fingers. 

Gandalf was thinking of a spring, nearly eighty years 
before, when Bilbo had run out of Bag End without a hand- 
kerchief. His hair was perhaps whiter than it had been then, 
and his beard and eyebrows were perhaps longer, and his 
face more lined with care and wisdom; but his eyes were as 
bright as ever, and he smoked and blew smoke-rings with the 
same vigour and delight. 

He was smoking now in silence, for Frodo was sitting still, 
deep in thought. Even in the light of morning he felt the dark 
shadow of the tidings that Gandalf had brought. At last he 
broke the silence. 

‘Last night you began to tell me strange things about my 
ring, Gandalf,’ he said. ‘And then you stopped, because you 
said that such matters were best left until daylight. Don’t you 
think you had better finish now? You say the ring is danger- 
ous, far more dangerous than I guess. In what way?’ 

‘In many ways,’ answered the wizard. ‘It is far more power- 
ful than I ever dared to think at first, so powerful that in the 
end it would utterly overcome anyone of mortal race who 
possessed it. It would possess him. 

‘In Eregion long ago many Elven-rings were made, magic 
rings as you call them, and they were, of course, of various 
kinds: some more potent and some less. The lesser rings were 
only essays in the craft before it was full-grown, and to the 
Elven-smiths they were but trifles — yet still to my mind 
dangerous for mortals. But the Great Rings, the Rings of 
Power, they were perilous. 

‘A mortal, Frodo, who keeps one of the Great Rings, does 
not die, but he does not grow or obtain more life, he merely 
continues, until at last every minute is a weariness. And if 
he often uses the Ring to make himself invisible, he fades: he 
becomes in the end invisible permanently, and walks in the 
twilight under the eye of the Dark Power that rules the Rings. 


62 THE FELLOWSHIP OF THE RING 


Yes, sooner or later — later, if he is strong or well-meaning to 
begin with, but neither strength nor good purpose will last — 
sooner or later the Dark Power will devour him.’ 

‘How terrifying!’ said Frodo. There was another long 
silence. The sound of Sam Gamgee cutting the lawn came 
in from the garden. 


‘How long have you known this?’ asked Frodo at length. 
‘And how much did Bilbo know?’ 

‘Bilbo knew no more than he told you, I am sure,’ said 
Gandalf. ‘He would certainly never have passed on to you 
anything that he thought would be a danger, even though I 
promised to look after you. He thought the ring was very 
beautiful, and very useful at need; and if anything was wrong 
or queer, it was himself. He said that it was “growing on his 
mind’’, and he was always worrying about it; but he did not 
suspect that the ring itself was to blame. Though he had 
found out that the thing needed looking after; it did not seem 
always of the same size or weight; it shrank or expanded in 
an odd way, and might suddenly slip off a finger where it 
had been tight.’ 

“Yes, he warned me of that in his last letter,’ said Frodo, 
‘so I have always kept it on its chain.’ 

‘Very wise,’ said Gandalf. “But as for his long life, Bilbo 
never connected it with the ring at all. He took all the credit 
for that to himself, and he was very proud of it. Though he 
was getting restless and uneasy. Thin and stretched he said. 
A sign that the ring was getting control.’ 

‘How long have you known all this?’ asked Frodo again. 

‘Known?’ said Gandalf. ‘I have known much that only the 
Wise know, Frodo. But if you mean “known about this ring’, 
well, I still do not know, one might say. There is a last test to 
make. But I no longer doubt my guess. 

‘When did I first begin to guess?’ he mused, searching back 
in memory. ‘Let me see — it was in the year that the White 
Council drove the Dark Power from Mirkwood, just before 
the Battle of Five Armies, that Bilbo found his ring. A shadow 


THE SHADOW OF THE PAST 63 


fell on my heart then, though I did not know yet what I 
feared. I wondered often how Gollum came by a Great Ring, 
as plainly it was — that at least was clear from the first. Then 
I heard Bilbo’s strange story of how he had “‘won” it, and I 
could not believe it. When I at last got the truth out of him, 
I saw at once that he had been trying to put his claim to the 
ring beyond doubt. Much like Gollum with his “birthday- 
present’. The lies were too much alike for my comfort. 
Clearly the ring had an unwholesome power that set to work 
on its keeper at once. That was the first real warning I had 
that all was not well. I told Bilbo often that such rings were 
better left unused; but he resented it, and soon got angry. 
There was little else that I could do. I could not take it from 
him without doing greater harm; and I had no right to do so 
anyway. I could only watch and wait. I might perhaps have 
consulted Saruman the White, but something always held 
me back.’ 

‘Who is he?’ asked Frodo. ‘I have never heard of him 
before.’ 

‘Maybe not,’ answered Gandalf. ‘Hobbits are, or were, no 
concern of his. Yet he is great among the Wise. He is the 
chief of my order and the head of the Council. His knowledge 
is deep, but his pride has grown with it, and he takes ill any 
meddling. The lore of the Elven-rings, great and small, is his 
province. He has long studied it, seeking the lost secrets of 
their making; but when the Rings were debated in the Coun- 
cil, all that he would reveal to us of his ring-lore told against 
my fears. So my doubt slept — but uneasily. Still I watched 
and I waited. 

‘And all seemed well with Bilbo. And the years passed. 
Yes, they passed, and they seemed not to touch him. He 
showed no signs of age. The shadow fell on me again. But I 
said to myself: “After all he comes of a long-lived family on 
his mother’s side. There is time yet. Wait!” 

‘And I waited. Until that night when he left this house. He 
said and did things then that filled me with a fear that no 
words of Saruman could allay. I knew at last that something 


64. THE FELLOWSHIP OF THE RING 


dark and deadly was at work. And I have spent most of the 
years since then in finding out the truth of it.’ 

“There wasn’t any permanent harm done, was there?’ asked 
Frodo anxiously. ‘He would get all right in time, wouldn’t 
he? Be able to rest in peace, I mean?’ 

‘He felt better at once,’ said Gandalf. ‘But there is only one 
Power in this world that knows all about the Rings and their 
effects; and as far as I know there is no Power in the world 
that knows all about hobbits. Among the Wise I am the 
only one that goes in for hobbit-lore: an obscure branch of 
knowledge, but full of surprises. Soft as butter they can be, 
and yet sometimes as tough as old tree-roots. I think it likely 
that some would resist the Rings far longer than most of 
the Wise would believe. I don’t think you need worry about 
Bilbo. 

‘Of course, he possessed the ring for many years, and used 
it, so it might take a long while for the influence to wear off 
— before it was safe for him to see it again, for instance. 
Otherwise, he might live on for years, quite happily: just stop 
as he was when he parted with it. For he gave it up in the 
end of his own accord: an important point. No, I was not 
troubled about dear Bilbo any more, once he had let the thing 
go. It is for you that I feel responsible. 

‘Ever since Bilbo left I have been deeply concerned about 
you, and about all these charming, absurd, helpless hobbits. 
It would be a grievous blow to the world, if the Dark Power 
overcame the Shire; if all your kind, jolly, stupid Bolgers, 
Hornblowers, Boffins, Bracegirdles, and the rest, not to 
mention the ridiculous Bagginses, became enslaved.’ 

Frodo shuddered. ‘But why should we be?’ he asked. ‘And 
why should he want such slaves?’ 

“To tell you the truth,’ replied Gandalf, ‘I believe that 
hitherto — hitherto, mark you — he has entirely overlooked 
the existence of hobbits. You should be thankful. But your 
safety has passed. He does not need you — he has many 
more useful servants — but he won’t forget you again. And 
hobbits as miserable slaves would please him far more than 


THE SHADOW OF THE PAST 65 


hobbits happy and free. There is such a thing as malice and 
revenge.’ 

‘Revenge?’ said Frodo. ‘Revenge for what? I still don’t 
understand what all this has to do with Bilbo and myself, and 
our ring.’ 

‘Tt has everything to do with it,’ said Gandalf. “You do not 
know the real peril yet; but you shall. I was not sure of it 
myself when I was last here; but the time has come to speak. 
Give me the ring for a moment.’ 


Frodo took it from his breeches-pocket, where it was 
clasped to a chain that hung from his belt. He unfastened it 
and handed it slowly to the wizard. It felt suddenly very 
heavy, as if either it or Frodo himself was in some way reluc- 
tant for Gandalf to touch it. 

Gandalf held it up. It looked to be made of pure and solid 
gold. ‘Can you see any markings on it?’ he asked. 

‘No,’ said Frodo. “There are none. It is quite plain, and it 
never shows a scratch or sign of wear.’ 

‘Well then, look!’ To Frodo’s astonishment and distress 
the wizard threw it suddenly into the middle of a glowing 
corner of the fire. Frodo gave a cry and groped for the tongs; 
but Gandalf held him back. 

‘Wait!’ he said in a commanding voice, giving Frodo a 
quick look from under his bristling brows. 

No apparent change came over the ring. After a while 
Gandalf got up, closed the shutters outside the window, and 
drew the curtains. The room became dark and silent, though 
the clack of Sam’s shears, now nearer to the windows, could 
still be heard faintly from the garden. For a moment the 
wizard stood looking at the fire; then he stooped and removed 
the ring to the hearth with the tongs, and at once picked it 
up. Frodo gasped. 

‘It is quite cool,’ said Gandalf. “Take it!’ Frodo received it 
on his shrinking palm: it seemed to have become thicker and 
heavier than ever. 

‘Hold it up!’ said Gandalf. ‘And look closely!’ 


66 THE FELLOWSHIP OF THE RING 


As Frodo did so, he now saw fine lines, finer than the finest 
pen-strokes, running along the ring, outside and inside: lines 
of fire that seemed to form the letters of a flowing script. 
They shone piercingly bright, and yet remote, as if out of a 
great depth. 


Ca 
Xv * U4 : 4 * s, Lg 


j a eh the Mae 

‘I cannot read the fiery letters,’ said Frodo in a quavering 
voice. 

‘No,’ said Gandalf, ‘but I can. The letters are Elvish, of an 
ancient mode, but the language is that of Mordor, which I 


will not utter here. But this in the Common Tongue is what 
is said, close enough: 


One Ring to rule them all, One Ring to find them, 
One Ring to bring them all and in the darkness bind them. 


It is only two lines of a verse long known in Elven-lore: 


Three Rings for the Elven-kings under the sky, 
Seven for the Dwarf-lords in their halls of stone, 
Nine for Mortal Men doomed to die, 
One for the Dark Lord on his dark throne 
In the Land of Mordor where the Shadows lie. 
One Ring to rule them all, One Ring to find them, 
One Ring to bring them all and in the darkness bind them 
In the Land of Mordor where the Shadows lie.’ 


He paused, and then said slowly in a deep voice: “This is 
the Master-ring, the One Ring to rule them all. This is the 
One Ring that he lost many ages ago, to the great weakening 


THE SHADOW OF THE PAST 67 


of his power. He greatly desires it — but he must vot get it.’ 

Frodo sat silent and motionless. Fear seemed to stretch out 
a vast hand, like a dark cloud rising in the East and looming 
up to engulf him. “This ring!’ he stammered. ‘How, how on 
earth did it come to me?’ 


‘Ah!’ said Gandalf. “That is a very long story. The begin- 
nings lie back in the Black Years, which only the lore-masters 
now remember. If I were to tell you all that tale, we should 
still be sitting here when Spring had passed into Winter. 

‘But last night I told you of Sauron the Great, the Dark 
Lord. The rumours that you have heard are true: he has 
indeed arisen again and left his hold in Mirkwood and 
returned to his ancient fastness in the Dark Tower of Mordor. 
‘That name even you hobbits have heard of, like a shadow on 
the borders of old stories. Always after a defeat and a respite, 
the Shadow takes another shape and grows again.’ 

‘I wish it need not have happened in my time,’ said Frodo. 

‘So do I,’ said Gandalf, ‘and so do all who live to see such 
times. But that is not for them to decide. All we have to 
decide is what to do with the time that is given us. And 
already, Frodo, our time is beginning to look black. The 
Enemy is fast becoming very strong. His plans are far from 
ripe, I think, but they are ripening. We shall be hard put to 
it. We should be very hard put to it, even if it were not for 
this dreadful chance. 

“The Enemy still lacks one thing to give him strength and 
knowledge to beat down all resistance, break the last defences, 
and cover all the lands in a second darkness. He lacks the 
One Ring. 

“The Three, fairest of all, the Elf-lords hid from him, and 
his hand never touched them or sullied them. Seven the 
Dwarf-kings possessed, but three he has recovered, and the 
others the dragons have consumed. Nine he gave to Mortal 
Men, proud and great, and so ensnared them. Long ago 
they fell under the dominion of the One, and they became 
Ringwraiths, shadows under his great Shadow, his most 


68 THE FELLOWSHIP OF THE RING 


terrible servants. Long ago. It is many a year since the Nine 
walked abroad. Yet who knows? As the Shadow grows once 
more, they too may walk again. But come! We will not speak 
of such things even in the morning of the Shire. 

‘So it is now: the Nine he has gathered to himself; the 
Seven also, or else they are destroyed. The Three are hidden 
still. But that no longer troubles him. He only needs the One; 
for he made that Ring himself, it is his, and he let a great part 
of his own former power pass into it, so that he could rule all 
the others. If he recovers it, then he will command them all 
again, wherever they be, even the Three, and all that has 
been wrought with them will be laid bare, and he will be 
stronger than ever. 

‘And this is the dreadful chance, Frodo. He believed that 
the One had perished; that the Elves had destroyed it, as 
should have been done. But he knows now that it has not 
perished, that it has been found. So he is seeking it, seeking 
it, and all his thought is bent on it. It is his great hope and 
our great fear.’ 

‘Why, why wasn’t it destroyed?’ cried Frodo. ‘And how 
did the Enemy ever come to lose it, if he was so strong, and 
it was so precious to him?’ He clutched the Ring in his hand, 
as if he saw already dark fingers stretching out to seize it. 

‘It was taken from him,’ said Gandalf. “The strength of 
the Elves to resist him was greater long ago; and not all 
Men were estranged from them. The Men of Westernesse 
came to their aid. That is a chapter of ancient history 
which it might be good to recall; for there was sorrow then 
too, and gathering dark, but great valour, and great deeds 
that were not wholly vain. One day, perhaps, I will tell you 
all the tale, or you shall hear it told in full by one who knows 
it best. 

‘But for the moment, since most of all you need to know 
how this thing came to you, and that will be tale enough, this 
is all that I will say. It was Gil-galad, Elven-king and Elendil of 
Westernesse who overthrew Sauron, though they themselves 
perished in the deed; and Isildur Elendil’s son cut the Ring 


THE SHADOW OF THE PAST 69 


from Sauron’s hand and took it for his own. Then Sauron 
was vanquished and his spirit fled and was hidden for long 
years, until his shadow took shape again in Mirkwood. 

‘But the Ring was lost. It fell into the Great River, Anduin, 
and vanished. For Isildur was marching north along the east 
banks of the River, and near the Gladden Fields he was 
waylaid by the Orcs of the Mountains, and almost all his folk 
were slain. He leaped into the waters, but the Ring slipped 
from his finger as he swam, and then the Orcs saw him and 
killed him with arrows.’ 

Gandalf paused. ‘And there in the dark pools amid the 
Gladden Fields,’ he said, ‘the Ring passed out of knowledge 
and legend; and even so much of its history is known now 
only to a few, and the Council of the Wise could discover no 
more. But at last I can carry on the story, I think. 


‘Long after, but still very long ago, there lived by the banks 
of the Great River on the edge of Wilderland a clever-handed 
and quiet-footed little people. I guess they were of hobbit- 
kind; akin to the fathers of the fathers of the Stoors, for they 
loved the River, and often swam in it, or made little boats of 
reeds. There was among them a family of high repute, for it 
was large and wealthier than most, and it was ruled by a 
grandmother of the folk, stern and wise in old lore, such as 
they had. The most inquisitive and curious-minded of that 
family was called Sméagol. He was interested in roots and 
beginnings; he dived into deep pools; he burrowed under 
trees and growing plants; he tunnelled into green mounds; 
and he ceased to look up at the hill-tops, or the leaves on 
trees, or the flowers opening in the air: his head and his eyes 
were downward. 

‘He had a friend called Déagol, of similar sort, sharper- 
eyed but not so quick and strong. On a time they took a boat 
and went down to the Gladden Fields, where there were great 
beds of iris and flowering reeds. There Sméagol got out and 
went nosing about the banks but Déagol sat in the boat and 
fished. Suddenly a great fish took his hook, and before he 


7O THE FELLOWSHIP OF THE RING 


knew where he was, he was dragged out and down into the 
water, to the bottom. Then he let go of his line, for he thought 
he saw something shining in the river-bed; and holding his 
breath he grabbed at it. 

“Then up he came spluttering, with weeds in his hair and 
a handful of mud; and he swam to the bank. And behold! 
when he washed the mud away, there in his hand lay a beauti- 
ful golden ring; and it shone and glittered in the sun, so that 
his heart was glad. But Sméagol had been watching him from 
behind a tree, and as Déagol gloated over the ring, Sméagol 
came softly up behind. 

““Give us that, Déagol, my love,” said Sméagol, over his 
friend’s shoulder. 

““Why?” said Déagol. 

‘*Because it’s my birthday, my love, and I wants it,” said 
Sméagol. 

““T don’t care,” said Déagol. “I have given you a present 
already, more than I could afford. I found this, and ’'m going 
to keep it.” 

““Oh, are you indeed, my love,” said Sméagol; and he 
caught Déagol by the throat and strangled him, because the 
gold looked so bright and beautiful. Then he put the ring on 
his finger. 

‘No one ever found out what had become of Déagol; he 
was murdered far from home, and his body was cunningly 
hidden. But Sméagol returned alone; and he found that none 
of his family could see him, when he was wearing the ring. 
He was very pleased with his discovery and he concealed it; 
and he used it to find out secrets, and he put his knowledge 
to crooked and malicious uses. He became sharp-eyed and 
keen-eared for all that was hurtful. The ring had given him 
power according to his stature. It is not to be wondered at 
that he became very unpopular and was shunned (when vis- 
ible) by all his relations. They kicked him, and he bit their 
feet. He took to thieving, and going about muttering to him- 
self, and gurgling in his throat. So they called him Gollum, 
and cursed him, and told him to go far away; and his grand- 


THE SHADOW OF THE PAST 71 


mother, desiring peace, expelled him from the family and 
turned him out of her hole. 

‘He wandered in loneliness, weeping a little for the hard- 
ness of the world, and he journeyed up the River, till he came 
to a stream that flowed down from the mountains, and he 
went that way. He caught fish in deep pools with invisible 
fingers and ate them raw. One day it was very hot, and as he 
was bending over a pool, he felt a burning on the back of his 
head, and a dazzling light from the water pained his wet eyes. 
He wondered at it, for he had almost forgotten about the 
Sun. Then for the last time he looked up and shook his fist 
at her. 

‘But as he lowered his eyes, he saw far ahead the tops of 
the Misty Mountains, out of which the stream came. And he 
thought suddenly: “It would be cool and shady under those 
mountains. The Sun could not watch me there. The roots of 
those mountains must be roots indeed; there must be great 
secrets buried there which have not been discovered since 
the beginning.” 

‘So he journeyed by night up into the highlands, and he 
found a little cave out of which the dark stream ran; and he 
wormed his way like a maggot into the heart of the hills, 
and vanished out of all knowledge. The Ring went into the 
shadows with him, and even the maker, when his power had 
begun to grow again, could learn nothing of it.’ 


‘Gollum!’ cried Frodo. ‘Gollum? Do you mean that this is 
the very Gollum-creature that Bilbo met? How loathsome!’ 

‘T think it is a sad story,’ said the wizard, ‘and it might have 
happened to others, even to some hobbits that I have known.’ 

‘I can’t believe that Gollum was connected with hobbits, 
however distantly,’ said Frodo with some heat. ‘What an 
abominable notion!’ 

‘It is true all the same,’ replied Gandalf. ‘About their 
origins, at any rate, I know more than hobbits do themselves. 
And even Bilbo’s story suggests the kinship. There was a 
great deal in the background of their minds and memories 


72 THE FELLOWSHIP OF THE RING 


that was very similar. They understood one another remark- 
ably well, very much better than a hobbit would understand, 
say, a Dwarf, or an Orc, or even an Elf. Think of the riddles 
they both knew, for one thing.’ 

‘Yes,’ said Frodo. “Though other folks besides hobbits ask 
riddles, and of much the same sort. And hobbits don’t cheat. 
Gollum meant to cheat all the time. He was just trying to 
put poor Bilbo off his guard. And I daresay it amused his 
wickedness to start a game which might end in providing him 
with an easy victim, but if he lost would not hurt him.’ 

‘Only too true, I fear,’ said Gandalf. ‘But there was some- 
thing else in it, I think, which you don’t see yet. Even Gollum 
was not wholly ruined. He had proved tougher than even one 
of the Wise would have guessed — as a hobbit might. There 
was a little corner of his mind that was still his own, and light 
came through it, as through a chink in the dark: light out of 
the past. It was actually pleasant, I think, to hear a kindly 
voice again, bringing up memories of wind, and trees, and 
sun on the grass, and such forgotten things. 

“But that, of course, would only make the evil part of him 
angrier in the end — unless it could be conquered. Unless it 
could be cured.’ Gandalf sighed. ‘Alas! there is little hope of 
that for him. Yet not no hope. No, not though he possessed 
the Ring so long, almost as far back as he can remember. For 
it was long since he had worn it much: in the black darkness 
it was seldom needed. Certainly he had never ‘‘faded’’. He is 
thin and tough still. But the thing was eating up his mind, of 
course, and the torment had become almost unbearable. 

‘All the ‘“‘great secrets”? under the mountains had turned 
out to be just empty night: there was nothing more to find out, 
nothing worth doing, only nasty furtive eating and resentful 
remembering. He was altogether wretched. He hated the 
dark, and he hated light more: he hated everything, and the 
Ring most of all.’ 

‘What do you mean?’ said Frodo. ‘Surely the Ring was his 
Precious and the only thing he cared for? But if he hated it, 
why didn’t he get rid of it, or go away and leave it?’ 


THE SHADOW OF THE PAST 73 


“You ought to begin to understand, Frodo, after all you 
have heard,’ said Gandalf. ‘He hated it and loved it, as he 
hated and loved himself. He could not get rid of it. He had 
no will left in the matter. 

‘A Ring of Power looks after itself, Frodo. Jt may slip off 
treacherously, but its keeper never abandons it. At most he 
plays with the idea of handing it on to someone else’s care — 
and that only at an early stage, when it first begins to grip. 
But as far as I know Bilbo alone in history has ever gone 
beyond playing, and really done it. He needed all my help, 
too. And even so he would never have just forsaken it, or cast 
it aside. It was not Gollum, Frodo, but the Ring itself that 
decided things. The Ring left him.’ 

‘What, just in time to meet Bilbo?’ said Frodo. ‘Wouldn’t 
an Orc have suited it better?’ 

‘Tt is no laughing matter,’ said Gandalf. ‘Not for you. It 
was the strangest event in the whole history of the Ring so 
far: Bilbo’s arrival just at that time, and putting his hand on 
it, blindly, in the dark. 

“There was more than one power at work, Frodo. The 
Ring was trying to get back to its master. It had slipped from 
Isildur’s hand and betrayed him; then when a chance came 
it caught poor Déagol, and he was murdered; and after that 
Gollum, and it had devoured him. It could make no further 
use of him: he was too small and mean; and as long as it 
stayed with him he would never leave his deep pool again. 
So now, when its master was awake once more and sending 
out his dark thought from Mirkwood, it abandoned Gollum. 
Only to be picked up by the most unlikely person imaginable: 
Bilbo from the Shire! 

‘Behind that there was something else at work, beyond any 
design of the Ring-maker. I can put it no plainer than by 
saying that Bilbo was meant to find the Ring, and not by its 
maker. In which case you also were meant to have it. And 
that may be an encouraging thought.’ 

‘It is not,’ said Frodo. “Though I am not sure that I under- 
stand you. But how have you learned all this about the Ring, 


74 THE FELLOWSHIP OF THE RING 


and about Gollum? Do you really know it all, or are you just 
guessing still?’ 

Gandalf looked at Frodo, and his eyes glinted. ‘I knew 
much and I have learned much,’ he answered. ‘But I am not 
going to give an account of all my doings to you. The history 
of Elendil and Isildur and the One Ring is known to all the 
Wise. Your ring is shown to be that One Ring by the fire- 
writing alone, apart from any other evidence.’ 

‘And when did you discover that?’ asked Frodo, inter- 
rupting. 

‘Just now in this room, of course,’ answered the wizard 
sharply. ‘But I expected to find it. I have come back from 
dark journeys and long search to make that final test. It is the 
last proof, and all is now only too clear. Making out Gollum’s 
part, and fitting it into the gap in the history, required some 
thought. I may have started with guesses about Gollum, but 
I am not guessing now. I know. I have seen him.’ 

“You have seen Gollum?’ exclaimed Frodo in amazement. 

‘Yes. The obvious thing to do, of course, if one could. I 
tried long ago; but I have managed it at last.’ 

“Then what happened after Bilbo escaped from him? Do 
you know that?’ 

‘Not so clearly. What I have told you is what Gollum was 
willing to tell — though not, of course, in the way I have 
reported it. Gollum is a liar, and you have to sift his words. 
For instance, he called the Ring his “‘birthday-present’’, and 
he stuck to that. He said it came from his grandmother, who 
had lots of beautiful things of that kind. A ridiculous story. I 
have no doubt that Sméagol’s grandmother was a matriarch, 
a great person in her way, but to talk of her possessing many 
Elven-rings was absurd, and as for giving them away, it was 
a lie. But a lie with a grain of truth. 

“The murder of Déagol haunted Gollum, and he had made 
up a defence, repeating it to his ‘‘Precious”” over and over 
again, as he gnawed bones in the dark, until he almost 
believed it. It was his birthday. Déagol ought to have given 
the ring to him. It had obviously turned up just so as to be 


THE SHADOW OF THE PAST 75 


a present. It was his birthday-present, and so on, and on. 

‘T endured him as long as I could, but the truth was desper- 
ately important, and in the end I had to be harsh. I put the 
fear of fire on him, and wrung the true story out of him, bit by 
bit, together with much snivelling and snarling. He thought he 
was misunderstood and ill-used. But when he had at last told 
me his history, as far as the end of the Riddle-game and 
Bilbo’s escape, he would not say any more, except in dark 
hints. Some other fear was on him greater than mine. He 
muttered that he was going to get his own back. People would 
see if he would stand being kicked, and driven into a hole 
and then robbed. Gollum had good friends now, good friends 
and very strong. They would help him. Baggins would pay 
for it. That was his chief thought. He hated Bilbo and cursed 
his name. What is more, he knew where he came from.’ 

‘But how did he find that out?’ asked Frodo. 

‘Well, as for the name, Bilbo very foolishly told Gollum 
himself; and after that it would not be difficult to discover 
his country, once Gollum came out. Oh yes, he came out. 
His longing for the Ring proved stronger than his fear of 
the Orcs, or even of the light. After a year or two he left the 
mountains. You see, though still bound by desire of it, the 
Ring was no longer devouring him; he began to revive a little. 
He felt old, terribly old, yet less timid, and he was mortally 
hungry. 

‘Light, light of Sun and Moon, he still feared and hated, 
and he always will, I think; but he was cunning. He found he 
could hide from daylight and moonshine, and make his way 
swiftly and softly by dead of night with his pale cold eyes, 
and catch small frightened or unwary things. He grew 
stronger and bolder with new food and new air. He found 
his way into Mirkwood, as one would expect.’ 

‘Is that where you found him?’ asked Frodo. 

‘I saw him there,’ answered Gandalf, ‘but before that he 
had wandered far, following Bilbo’s trail. It was difficult to 
learn anything from him for certain, for his talk was con- 
stantly interrupted by curses and threats. ““What had it got 


76 THE FELLOWSHIP OF THE RING 


in its pocketses?”’ he said. “It wouldn’t say, no precious. Little 
cheat. Not a fair question. It cheated first, it did. It broke the 
rules. We ought to have squeezed it, yes precious. And we 
will, precious!” 

“That is a sample of his talk. I don’t suppose you want any 
more. I had weary days of it. But from hints dropped among 
the snarls I gathered that his padding feet had taken him at 
last to Esgaroth, and even to the streets of Dale, listening 
secretly and peering. Well, the news of the great events went 
far and wide in Wilderland, and many had heard Bilbo’s 
name and knew where he came from. We had made no secret 
of our return journey to his home in the West. Gollum’s 
sharp ears would soon learn what he wanted.’ 

“Then why didn’t he track Bilbo further?’ asked Frodo. 
‘Why didn’t he come to the Shire?’ 

‘Ah,’ said Gandalf, ‘now we come to it. I think Gollum 
tried to. He set out and came back westward, as far as the 
Great River. But then he turned aside. He was not daunted 
by the distance, I am sure. No, something else drew him 
away. So my friends think, those that hunted him for me. 

“The Wood-elves tracked him first, an easy task for them, 
for his trail was still fresh then. Through Mirkwood and back 
again it led them, though they never caught him. The wood 
was full of the rumour of him, dreadful tales even among 
beasts and birds. The Woodmen said that there was some 
new terror abroad, a ghost that drank blood. It climbed trees 
to find nests; it crept into holes to find the young; it slipped 
through windows to find cradles. 

‘But at the western edge of Mirkwood the trail turned 
away. It wandered off southwards and passed out of the 
Wood-elves’ ken, and was lost. And then I made a great 
mistake. Yes, Frodo, and not the first; though I fear it may 
prove the worst. I let the matter be. I let him go; for I had 
much else to think of at that time, and I still trusted the lore 
of Saruman. 

‘Well, that was years ago. I have paid for it since with many 
dark and dangerous days. The trail was long cold when I 


THE SHADOW OF THE PAST V7 


took it up again, after Bilbo left here. And my search would 
have been in vain, but for the help that I had from a friend: 
Aragorn, the greatest traveller and huntsman of this age of 
the world. Together we sought for Gollum down the whole 
length of Wilderland, without hope, and without success. But 
at last, when I had given up the chase and turned to other 
paths, Gollum was found. My friend returned out of great 
perils bringing the miserable creature with him. 

‘What he had been doing he would not say. He only wept 
and called us cruel, with many a gollum in his throat; and 
when we pressed him he whined and cringed, and rubbed 
his long hands, licking his fingers as if they pained him, as if 
he remembered some old torture. But I am afraid there is no 
possible doubt: he had made his slow, sneaking way, step by 
step, mile by mile, south, down at last to the Land of Mordor.’ 


A heavy silence fell in the room. Frodo could hear his heart 
beating. Even outside everything seemed still. No sound of 
Sam’s shears could now be heard. 

‘Yes, to Mordor,’ said Gandalf. ‘Alas! Mordor draws all 
wicked things, and the Dark Power was bending all its will to 
gather them there. The Ring of the Enemy would leave its 
mark, too, leave him open to the summons. And all folk were 
whispering then of the new Shadow in the South, and its 
hatred of the West. There were his fine new friends, who 
would help him in his revenge! 

‘Wretched fool! In that land he would learn much, too 
much for his comfort. And sooner or later as he lurked and 
pried on the borders he would be caught, and taken — for 
examination. That was the way of it, I fear. When he was 
found he had already been there long, and was on his way 
back. On some errand of mischief. But that does not matter 
much now. His worst mischief was done. 

“Yes, alas! through him the Enemy has learned that the 
One has been found again. He knows where Isildur fell. He 
knows where Gollum found his ring. He knows that it is a 
Great Ring, for it gave long life. He knows that it is not one 


78 THE FELLOWSHIP OF THE RING 


of the Three, for they have never been lost, and they endure 
no evil. He knows that it is not one of the Seven, or the Nine, 
for they are accounted for. He knows that it is the One. And 
he has at last heard, I think, of hobbits and the Shire. 

“The Shire — he may be seeking for it now, if he has not 
already found out where it lies. Indeed, Frodo, I fear that he 
may even think that the long-unnoticed name of Baggins has 
become important.’ 

‘But this is terrible!’ cried Frodo. ‘Far worse than the worst 
that I imagined from your hints and warnings. O Gandalf, 
best of friends, what am I to do? For now I am really afraid. 
What am I to do? What a pity that Bilbo did not stab that 
vile creature, when he had a chance!’ 

‘Pity? It was Pity that stayed his hand. Pity, and Mercy: 
not to strike without need. And he has been well rewarded, 
Frodo. Be sure that he took so little hurt from the evil, and 
escaped in the end, because he began his ownership of the 
Ring so. With Pity.’ 

‘Tam sorry,’ said Frodo. ‘But I am frightened; and I do not 
feel any pity for Gollum.’ 

“You have not seen him,’ Gandalf broke in. 

‘No, and I don’t want to,’ said Frodo. ‘I can’t understand 
you. Do you mean to say that you, and the Elves, have let 
him live on after all those horrible deeds? Now at any rate he 
is as bad as an Orc, and just an enemy. He deserves death.’ 

‘Deserves it! I daresay he does. Many that live deserve 
death. And some that die deserve life. Can you give it to 
them? Then do not be too eager to deal out death in judge- 
ment. For even the very wise cannot see all ends. I have not 
much hope that Gollum can be cured before he dies, but 
there is a chance of it. And he is bound up with the fate of 
the Ring. My heart tells me that he has some part to play yet, 
for good or ill, before the end; and when that comes, the pity 
of Bilbo may rule the fate of many — yours not least. In any 
case we did not kill him: he is very old and very wretched. 
The Wood-elves have him in prison, but they treat him with 
such kindness as they can find in their wise hearts.’ 


THE SHADOW OF THE PAST 79 


‘All the same,’ said Frodo, ‘even if Bilbo could not kill 
Gollum, I wish he had not kept the Ring. I wish he had never 
found it, and that I had not got it! Why did you let me keep 
it? Why didn’t you make me throw it away, or, or destroy it?’ 

‘Let your Make you?’ said the wizard. ‘Haven’t you been 
listening to all that I have said? You are not thinking of what 
you are saying. But as for throwing it away, that was obviously 
wrong. These Rings have a way of being found. In evil hands 
it might have done great evil. Worst of all, it might have fallen 
into the hands of the Enemy. Indeed it certainly would; for 
this is the One, and he is exerting all his power to find it or 
draw it to himself. 

‘Of course, my dear Frodo, it was dangerous for you; and 
that has troubled me deeply. But there was so much at stake 
that I had to take some risk — though even when I was far 
away there has never been a day when the Shire has not been 
guarded by watchful eyes. As long as you never used it, I did 
not think that the Ring would have any lasting effect on 
you, not for evil, not at any rate for a very long time. And 
you must remember that nine years ago, when I last saw you, 
I still knew little for certain.’ 

‘But why not destroy it, as you say should have been done 
long ago?’ cried Frodo again. ‘If you had warned me, or even 
sent me a message, I would have done away with it.’ 

‘Would you? How would you do that? Have you ever tried?’ 

‘No. But I suppose one could hammer it or melt it.’ 

“Try! said Gandalf. “Try now!’ 


Frodo drew the Ring out of his pocket again and looked at 
it. It now appeared plain and smooth, without mark or device 
that he could see. The gold looked very fair and pure, and 
Frodo thought how rich and beautiful was its colour, how 
perfect was its roundness. It was an admirable thing and 
altogether precious. When he took it out he had intended to 
fling it from him into the very hottest part of the fire. But he 
found now that he could not do so, not without a great 
struggle. He weighed the Ring in his hand, hesitating, and 


80 THE FELLOWSHIP OF THE RING 


forcing himself to remember all that Gandalf had told him; 
and then with an effort of will he made a movement, as if to 
cast it away — but he found that he had put it back in his 
pocket. 

Gandalf laughed grimly. “You see? Already you too, Frodo, 
cannot easily let it go, nor will to damage it. And I could not 
““make” you — except by force, which would break your mind. 
But as for breaking the Ring, force is useless. Even if you 
took it and struck it with a heavy sledge-hammer, it would 
make no dint in it. It cannot be unmade by your hands, or 
by mine. 

“Your small fire, of course, would not melt even ordinary 
gold. This Ring has already passed through it unscathed, and 
even unheated. But there is no smith’s forge in this Shire that 
could change it at all. Not even the anvils and furnaces of the 
Dwarves could do that. It has been said that dragon-fire could 
melt and consume the Rings of Power, but there is not now 
any dragon left on earth in which the old fire is hot enough; 
nor was there ever any dragon, not even Ancalagon the Black, 
who could have harmed the One Ring, the Ruling Ring, for 
that was made by Sauron himself. 

“There is only one way: to find the Cracks of Doom in the 
depths of Orodruin, the Fire-mountain, and cast the Ring in 
there, if you really wish to destroy it, to put it beyond the 
grasp of the Enemy for ever.’ 

‘I do really wish to destroy it!’ cried Frodo. ‘Or, well, to 
have it destroyed. I am not made for perilous quests. I wish 
I had never seen the Ring! Why did it come to me? Why 
was I chosen?’ 

‘Such questions cannot be answered,’ said Gandalf. ‘You 
may be sure that it was not for any merit that others do not 
possess: not for power or wisdom, at any rate. But you have 
been chosen, and you must therefore use such strength and 
heart and wits as you have.’ 

‘But I have so little of any of these things! You are wise 
and powerful. Will you not take the Ring?’ 

‘No!’ cried Gandalf, springing to his feet. ‘With that power 


THE SHADOW OF THE PAST 81 


I should have power too great and terrible. And over me the 
Ring would gain a power still greater and more deadly.’ His 
eyes flashed and his face was lit as by a fire within. “Do not 
tempt me! For I do not wish to become like the Dark Lord 
himself. Yet the way of the Ring to my heart is by pity, pity 
for weakness and the desire of strength to do good. Do not 
tempt me! I dare not take it, not even to keep it safe, unused. 
The wish to wield it would be too great for my strength. I 
shall have such need of it. Great perils lie before me.’ 

He went to the window and drew aside the curtains and 
the shutters. Sunlight streamed back again into the room. 
Sam passed along the path outside whistling. ‘And now,’ said 
the wizard, turning back to Frodo, ‘the decision lies with you. 
But I will always help you.’ He laid his hand on Frodo’s 
shoulder. ‘I will help you bear this burden, as long as it is 
yours to bear. But we must do something, soon. The Enemy 
is moving.’ 


There was a long silence. Gandalf sat down again and 
puffed at his pipe, as if lost in thought. His eyes seemed 
closed, but under the lids he was watching Frodo intently. 
Frodo gazed fixedly at the red embers on the hearth, until 
they filled all his vision, and he seemed to be looking down 
into profound wells of fire. He was thinking of the fabled 
Cracks of Doom and the terror of the Fiery Mountain. 

‘Well!’ said Gandalf at last. ‘What are you thinking about? 
Have you decided what to do?’ 

‘No!’ answered Frodo, coming back to himself out of dark- 
ness, and finding to his surprise that it was not dark, and that 
out of the window he could see the sunlit garden. ‘Or perhaps, 
yes. As far as I understand what you have said, I suppose I 
must keep the Ring and guard it, at least for the present, 
whatever it may do to me.’ 

‘Whatever it may do, it will be slow, slow to evil, if you 
keep it with that purpose,’ said Gandalf. 

‘Thope so,’ said Frodo. ‘But I hope that you may find some 
other better keeper soon. But in the meanwhile it seems that 


82 THE FELLOWSHIP OF THE RING 


Iam a danger, a danger to all that live near me. I cannot keep 
the Ring and stay here. I ought to leave Bag End, leave the 
Shire, leave everything and go away.’ He sighed. 

‘I should like to save the Shire, if I could — though there 
have been times when I thought the inhabitants too stupid 
and dull for words, and have felt that an earthquake or an 
invasion of dragons might be good for them. But I don’t feel 
like that now. I feel that as long as the Shire lies behind, safe 
and comfortable, I shall find wandering more bearable: I shall 
know that somewhere there is a firm foothold, even if my feet 
cannot stand there again. 

‘Of course, I have sometimes thought of going away, but 
I imagined that as a kind of holiday, a series of adventures 
like Bilbo’s or better, ending in peace. But this would mean 
exile, a flight from danger into danger, drawing it after me. 
And I suppose I must go alone, if I am to do that and save 
the Shire. But I feel very small, and very uprooted, and well 
— desperate. The Enemy is so strong and terrible.’ 

He did not tell Gandalf, but as he was speaking a great 
desire to follow Bilbo flamed up in his heart — to follow Bilbo, 
and even perhaps to find him again. It was so strong that it 
overcame his fear: he could almost have run out there and 
then down the road without his hat, as Bilbo had done on a 
similar morning long ago. 

‘My dear Frodo!’ exclaimed Gandalf. ‘Hobbits really are 
amazing creatures, as I have said before. You can learn all 
that there is to know about their ways in a month, and yet 
after a hundred years they can still surprise you at a pinch. I 
hardly expected to get such an answer, not even from you. 
But Bilbo made no mistake in choosing his heir, though he 
little thought how important it would prove. I am afraid you 
are right. The Ring will not be able to stay hidden in the 
Shire much longer; and for your own sake, as well as for 
others, you will have to go, and leave the name of Baggins 
behind you. That name will not be safe to have, outside the 
Shire or in the Wild. I will give you a travelling name now. 
When you go, go as Mr. Underhill. 


THE SHADOW OF THE PAST 83 


‘But I don’t think you need go alone. Not if you know of 
anyone you can trust, and who would be willing to go by 
your side — and that you would be willing to take into 
unknown perils. But if you look for a companion, be careful 
in choosing! And be careful of what you say, even to your 
closest friends! ‘The enemy has many spies and many ways 
of hearing.’ 

Suddenly he stopped as if listening. Frodo became aware 
that all was very quiet, inside and outside. Gandalf crept to 
one side of the window. Then with a dart he sprang to the 
sill, and thrust a long arm out and downwards. There was a 
squawk, and up came Sam Gamgee’s curly head hauled by 
one ear. 

‘Well, well, bless my beard!’ said Gandalf. ‘Sam Gamgee 
is it? Now what may you be doing?’ 

‘Lor bless you, Mr. Gandalf, sir! said Sam. ‘Nothing! 
Leastways I was just trimming the grass-border under the 
window, if you follow me.’ He picked up his shears and 
exhibited them as evidence. 

‘T don’t,’ said Gandalf grimly. ‘It is some time since I last 
heard the sound of your shears. How long have you been 
eavesdropping?’ 

‘Eavesdropping, sir? I don’t follow you, begging your 
pardon. There ain’t no eaves at Bag End, and that’s a fact.’ 

‘Don’t be a fool! What have you heard, and why did you 
listen?’ Gandalf’s eyes flashed and his brows stuck out like 
bristles. 

‘Mr. Frodo, sir!’ cried Sam quaking. “Don’t let him hurt 
me, sir! Don’t let him turn me into anything unnatural! My 
old dad would take on so. I meant no harm, on my honour, 
sir!’ 

‘He won’t hurt you,’ said Frodo, hardly able to keep from 
laughing, although he was himself startled and rather puzzled. 
‘He knows, as well as I do, that you mean no harm. But just 
you up and answer his questions straight away!’ 

‘Well, sir,’ said Sam dithering a little. ‘I heard a deal that 
I didn’t rightly understand, about an enemy, and rings, and 


84 THE FELLOWSHIP OF THE RING 


Mr. Bilbo, sir, and dragons, and a fiery mountain, and — and 
Elves, sir. I listened because I couldn’t help myself, if you 
know what I mean. Lor bless me, sir, but I do love tales of 
that sort. And I believe them too, whatever Ted may say. 
Elves, sir! I would dearly love to see them. Couldn’t you take 
me to see Elves, sir, when you go?’ 

Suddenly Gandalf laughed. ‘Come inside!’ he shouted, and 
putting out both his arms he lifted the astonished Sam, shears, 
grass-clippings and all, right through the window and stood 
him on the floor. “lake you to see Elves, eh?’ he said, eyeing 
Sam closely, but with a smile flickering on his face. ‘So you 
heard that Mr. Frodo is going away?’ 

‘I did, sir. And that’s why I choked: which you heard 
seemingly. I tried not to, sir, but it burst out of me: I was so 
upset.’ 

‘It can’t be helped, Sam,’ said Frodo sadly. He had sud- 
denly realized that flying from the Shire would mean more 
painful partings than merely saying farewell to the familiar 
comforts of Bag End. ‘I shall have to go. But’ — and here he 
looked hard at Sam — ‘if you really care about me, you will 
keep that dead secret. See? If you don’t, if you even breathe 
a word of what you’ve heard here, then I hope Gandalf will 
turn you into a spotted toad and fill the garden full of grass- 
snakes.’ 

Sam fell on his knees, trembling. ‘Get up, Sam!’ said 
Gandalf. ‘I have thought of something better than that. Some- 
thing to shut your mouth, and punish you properly for listen- 
ing. You shall go away with Mr. Frodo!’ 

‘Me, sir! cried Sam, springing up like a dog invited for a 
walk. ‘Me go and see Elves and all! Hooray!’ he shouted, and 
then burst into tears. 


Chapter 3 


THREE IS COMPANY 


“You ought to go quietly, and you ought to go soon,’ said 
Gandalf. Two or three weeks had passed, and still Frodo 
made no sign of getting ready to go. 

‘I know. But it is difficult to do both,’ he objected. ‘If I just 
vanish like Bilbo, the tale will be all over the Shire in no time.’ 

‘Of course you mustn’t vanish!’ said Gandalf. “That 
wouldn’t do at all! I said soon, not instantly. If you can think 
of any way of slipping out of the Shire without its being 
generally known, it will be worth a little delay. But you must 
not delay too long.’ 

‘What about the autumn, on or after Our Birthday?’ asked 
Frodo. ‘I think I could probably make some arrangements by 
then.’ 

To tell the truth, he was very reluctant to start, now that it 
had come to the point: Bag End seemed a more desirable 
residence than it had for years, and he wanted to savour as 
much as he could of his last summer in the Shire. When 
autumn came, he knew that part at least of his heart would 
think more kindly of journeying, as it always did at that 
season. He had indeed privately made up his mind to leave 
on his fiftieth birthday: Bilbo’s one hundred and twenty- 
eighth. It seemed somehow the proper day on which to set 
out and follow him. Following Bilbo was uppermost in his 
mind, and the one thing that made the thought of leaving 
bearable. He thought as little as possible about the Ring, and 
where it might lead him in the end. But he did not tell all his 
thoughts to Gandalf. What the wizard guessed was always 
difficult to tell. 

He looked at Frodo and smiled. ‘Very well,’ he said. ‘I think 
that will do — but it must not be any later. I am getting very 


86 THE FELLOWSHIP OF THE RING 


anxious. In the meanwhile, do take care, and don’t let out 
any hint of where you are going! And see that Sam Gamgee 
does not talk. If he does, I really shall turn him into a toad.’ 

‘As for where Iam going,’ said Frodo, ‘it would be difficult 
to give that away, for I have no clear idea myself, yet.’ 

‘Don’t be absurd!’ said Gandalf. ‘I am not warning you 
against leaving an address at the post-office! But you are 
leaving the Shire — and that should not be known, until you 
are far away. And you must go, or at least set out, either 
North, South, West or East — and the direction should cer- 
tainly not be known.’ 

‘I have been so taken up with the thoughts of leaving Bag 
End, and of saying farewell, that I have never even considered 
the direction,’ said Frodo. ‘For where am I to go? And by 
what shall I steer? What is to be my quest? Bilbo went to find 
a treasure, there and back again; but I go to lose one, and not 
return, as far as I can see.’ 

‘But you cannot see very far,’ said Gandalf. ‘Neither can 
I. It may be your task to find the Cracks of Doom; but that 
quest may be for others: I do not know. At any rate you are 
not ready for that long road yet.’ 

‘No indeed!’ said Frodo. “But in the meantime what course 
am I to take?’ 

“Towards danger; but not too rashly, nor too straight,’ 
answered the wizard. ‘If you want my advice, make for 
Rivendell. That journey should not prove too perilous, 
though the Road is less easy than it was, and it will grow 
worse as the year fails.’ 

‘Rivendell!’ said Frodo. ‘Very good: I will go east, and I 
will make for Rivendell. I will take Sam to visit the Elves; he 
will be delighted.’ He spoke lightly; but his heart was moved 
suddenly with a desire to see the house of Elrond Halfelven, 
and breathe the air of that deep valley where many of the 
Fair Folk still dwelt in peace. 


One summer’s evening an astonishing piece of news 
reached the Ivy Bush and Green Dragon. Giants and other 


THREE IS COMPANY 87 


portents on the borders of the Shire were forgotten for more 
important matters: Mr. Frodo was selling Bag End, indeed 
he had already sold it — to the Sackville-Bagginses! 

‘For a nice bit, too,’ said some. ‘At a bargain price,’ said 
others, ‘and that’s more likely when Mistress Lobelia’s the 
buyer.’ (Otho had died some years before, at the ripe but 
disappointed age of 102.) 

Just why Mr. Frodo was selling his beautiful hole was even 
more debatable than the price. A few held the theory — sup- 
ported by the nods and hints of Mr. Baggins himself — that 
Frodo’s money was running out: he was going to leave 
Hobbiton and live in a quiet way on the proceeds of the sale 
down in Buckland among his Brandybuck relations. ‘As far 
from the Sackville-Bagginses as may be,’ some added. But so 
firmly fixed had the notion of the immeasurable wealth of the 
Bagginses of Bag End become that most found this hard to 
believe, harder than any other reason or unreason that their 
fancy could suggest: to most it suggested a dark and yet 
unrevealed plot by Gandalf. Though he kept himself very 
quiet and did not go about by day, it was well known that he 
was ‘hiding up in the Bag End’. But however a removal might 
fit in with the designs of his wizardry, there was no doubt 
about the fact: Frodo Baggins was going back to Buckland. 

‘Yes, I shall be moving this autumn,’ he said. ‘Merry 
Brandybuck is looking out for a nice little hole for me, or 
perhaps a small house.’ 

As a matter of fact with Merry’s help he had already chosen 
and bought a little house at Crickhollow in the country 
beyond Bucklebury. To all but Sam he pretended he was 
going to settle down there permanently. The decision to set 
out eastwards had suggested the idea to him; for Buckland 
was on the eastern borders of the Shire, and as he had lived 
there in childhood his going back would at least seem 
credible. 


Gandalf stayed in the Shire for over two months. Then one 
evening, at the end of June, soon after Frodo’s plan had been 


88 THE FELLOWSHIP OF THE RING 


finally arranged, he suddenly announced that he was going 
off again next morning. ‘Only for a short while, I hope,’ he 
said. ‘But I am going down beyond the southern borders to 
get some news, if I can. I have been idle longer than I should.’ 

He spoke lightly, but it seemed to Frodo that he looked 
rather worried. ‘Has anything happened?’ he asked. 

‘Well no; but I have heard something that has made me 
anxious and needs looking into. If I think it necessary after 
all for you to get off at once, I shall come back immediately, 
or at least send word. In the meanwhile stick to your plan; 
but be more careful than ever, especially of the Ring. Let me 
impress on you once more: don’t use it!” 

He went off at dawn. ‘I may be back any day,’ he said. ‘At 
the very latest I shall come back for the farewell party. I think 
after all you may need my company on the Road.’ 

At first Frodo was a good deal disturbed, and wondered 
often what Gandalf could have heard; but his uneasiness 
wore off, and in the fine weather he forgot his troubles for a 
while. The Shire had seldom seen so fair a summer, or so 
rich an autumn: the trees were laden with apples, honey was 
dripping in the combs, and the corn was tall and full. 

Autumn was well under way before Frodo began to worry 
about Gandalf again. September was passing and there was 
still no news of him. The Birthday, and the removal, drew 
nearer, and still he did not come, or send word. Bag End 
began to be busy. Some of Frodo’s friends came to stay and 
help him with the packing: there was Fredegar Bolger and 
Folco Boffin, and of course his special friends Pippin Took 
and Merry Brandybuck. Between them they turned the whole 
place upside-down. 

On September 2oth two covered carts went off laden to 
Buckland, conveying the furniture and goods that Frodo had 
not sold to his new home, by way of the Brandywine 
Bridge. The next day Frodo became really anxious, and kept 
a constant look-out for Gandalf. Thursday, his birthday 
morning, dawned as fair and clear as it had long ago for 
Bilbo’s great party. Still Gandalf did not appear. In the 


THREE IS COMPANY 89 


evening Frodo gave his farewell feast: it was quite small, just 
a dinner for himself and his four helpers; but he was troubled 
and felt in no mood for it. The thought that he would so 
soon have to part with his young friends weighed on his heart. 
He wondered how he would break it to them. 

The four younger hobbits were, however, in high spirits, 
and the party soon became very cheerful in spite of Gandalf’s 
absence. The dining-room was bare except for a table and 
chairs, but the food was good, and there was good wine: 
Frodo’s wine had not been included in the sale to the 
Sackville-Bagginses. 

‘Whatever happens to the rest of my stuff, when the S.-B.s 
get their claws on it, at any rate I have found a good home 
for this!’ said Frodo, as he drained his glass. It was the last 
drop of Old Winyards. 

When they had sung many songs, and talked of many 
things they had done together, they toasted Bilbo’s birthday, 
and they drank his health and Frodo’s together according to 
Frodo’s custom. Then they went out for a sniff of air, and 
glimpse of the stars, and then they went to bed. Frodo’s party 
was over, and Gandalf had not come. 


The next morning they were busy packing another cart 
with the remainder of the luggage. Merry took charge of this, 
and drove off with Fatty (that is Fredegar Bolger). ‘Someone 
must get there and warm the house before you arrive,’ said 
Merry. ‘Well, see you later — the day after tomorrow, if you 
don’t go to sleep on the way!’ 

Folco went home after lunch, but Pippin remained behind. 
Frodo was restless and anxious, listening in vain for a sound 
of Gandalf. He decided to wait until nightfall. After that, if 
Gandalf wanted him urgently, he would go to Crickhollow, 
and might even get there first. For Frodo was going on foot. 
His plan — for pleasure and a last look at the Shire as much as 
any other reason — was to walk from Hobbiton to Bucklebury 
Ferry, taking it fairly easy. 

‘IT shall get myself a bit into training, too,’ he said, looking 


90 THE FELLOWSHIP OF THE RING 


at himself in a dusty mirror in the half-empty hall. He had 
not done any strenuous walking for a long time, and the 
reflection looked rather flabby, he thought. 

After lunch, the Sackville-Bagginses, Lobelia and her 
sandy-haired son, Lotho, turned up, much to Frodo’s annoy- 
ance. ‘Ours at last!’ said Lobelia, as she stepped inside. It was 
not polite; nor strictly true, for the sale of Bag End did not 
take effect until midnight. But Lobelia can perhaps be for- 
given: she had been obliged to wait about seventy-seven years 
longer for Bag End than she once hoped, and she was now a 
hundred years old. Anyway, she had come to see that nothing 
she had paid for had been carried off; and she wanted the 
keys. It took a long while to satisfy her, as she had brought a 
complete inventory with her and went right through it. In the 
end she departed with Lotho and the spare key and the 
promise that the other key would be left at the Gamgees’ in 
Bagshot Row. She snorted, and showed plainly that she 
thought the Gamgees capable of plundering the hole during 
the night. Frodo did not offer her any tea. 

He took his own tea with Pippin and Sam Gamgee in the 
kitchen. It had been officially announced that Sam was 
coming to Buckland ‘to do for Mr. Frodo and look after his 
bit of garden’; an arrangement that was approved by the 
Gaffer, though it did not console him for the prospect of 
having Lobelia as a neighbour. 

‘Our last meal at Bag End!’ said Frodo, pushing back his 
chair. They left the washing up for Lobelia. Pippin and Sam 
strapped up their three packs and piled them in the porch. 
Pippin went out for a last stroll in the garden. Sam dis- 
appeared. 


The sun went down. Bag End seemed sad and gloomy and 
dishevelled. Frodo wandered round the familiar rooms, and 
saw the light of the sunset fade on the walls, and shadows 
creep out of the corners. It grew slowly dark indoors. He 
went out and walked down to the gate at the bottom of the 
path, and then on a short way down the Hill Road. He half 


THREE IS COMPANY OI 


expected to see Gandalf come striding up through the dusk. 

The sky was clear and the stars were growing bright. ‘It’s 
going to be a fine night,’ he said aloud. “That’s good for a 
beginning. I feel like walking. I can’t bear any more hanging 
about. I am going to start, and Gandalf must follow me.’ He 
turned to go back, and then stopped, for he heard voices, just 
round the corner by the end of Bagshot Row. One voice was 
certainly the old Gaffer’s; the other was strange, and some- 
how unpleasant. He could not make out what it said, but he 
heard the Gaffer’s answers, which were rather shrill. The old 
man seemed put out. 

‘No, Mr. Baggins has gone away. Went this morning, and 
my Sam went with him: anyway all his stuff went. Yes, sold 
out and gone, I tell’ee. Why? Why’s none of my business, 
or yours. Where to? That ain’t no secret. He’s moved to 
Bucklebury or some such place, away down yonder. Yes it is 
—a tidy way. I’ve never been so far myself; they’re queer folks 
in Buckland. No, I can’t give no message. Good night to 
you!’ 

Footsteps went away down the Hill. Frodo wondered 
vaguely why the fact that they did not come on up the Hill 
seemed a great relief. ‘I am sick of questions and curiosity 
about my doings, I suppose,’ he thought. “What an inquisitive 
lot they all are!’ He had half a mind to go and ask the Gaffer 
who the inquirer was; but he thought better (or worse) of it, 
and turned and walked quickly back to Bag End. 

Pippin was sitting on his pack in the porch. Sam was not 
there. Frodo stepped inside the dark door. ‘Sam!’ he called. 
‘Sam! Time!’ 

‘Coming, sir!’ came the answer from far within, followed 
soon by Sam himself, wiping his mouth. He had been saying 
farewell to the beer-barrel in the cellar. 

‘All aboard, Sam?’ said Frodo. 

‘Yes, sir. Pll last for a bit now, sir.’ 

Frodo shut and locked the round door, and gave the key 
to Sam. ‘Run down with this to your home, Sam!’ he said. 
“Then cut along the Row and meet us as quick as you can at 


Q2 THE FELLOWSHIP OF THE RING 


the gate in the lane beyond the meadows. We are not going 
through the village tonight. Too many ears pricking and eyes 
prying.’ Sam ran off at full speed. 

‘Well, now we’re off at last!’ said Frodo. They shouldered 
their packs and took up their sticks, and walked round the 
corner to the west side of Bag End. ‘Good-bye!’ said Frodo, 
looking at the dark blank windows. He waved his hand, and 
then turned and (following Bilbo, if he had known it) hurried 
after Peregrin down the garden-path. They jumped over the 
low place in the hedge at the bottom and took to the fields, 
passing into the darkness like a rustle in the grasses. 


At the bottom of the Hill on its western side they came to 
the gate opening on to a narrow lane. There they halted and 
adjusted the straps of their packs. Presently Sam appeared, 
trotting quickly and breathing hard; his heavy pack was 
hoisted high on his shoulders, and he had put on his head a 
tall shapeless felt bag, which he called a hat. In the gloom he 
looked very much like a dwarf. 

‘Tam sure you have given me all the heaviest stuff,’ said 
Frodo. ‘I pity snails, and all that carry their homes on their 
backs.’ 

‘I could take a lot more yet, sir. My packet is quite light,’ 
said Sam stoutly and untruthfully. 

‘No you don’t, Sam!’ said Pippin. ‘It is good for him. He’s 
got nothing except what he ordered us to pack. He’s been 
slack lately, and he’ll feel the weight less when he’s walked 
off some of his own.’ 

‘Be kind to a poor old hobbit!’ laughed Frodo. ‘I shall be 
as thin as a willow-wand, I’m sure, before I get to Buckland. 
But I was talking nonsense. I suspect you have taken more 
than your share, Sam, and I shall look into it at our next 
packing.’ He picked up his stick again. “Well, we all like 
walking in the dark,’ he said, ‘so let’s put some miles behind 
us before bed.’ 

For a short way they followed the lane westwards. Then 
leaving it they turned left and took quietly to the fields again. 


THREE IS COMPANY 93 


‘They went in single file along hedgerows and the borders of 
coppices, and night fell dark about them. In their dark cloaks 
they were as invisible as if they all had magic rings. Since 
they were all hobbits, and were trying to be silent, they made 
no noise that even hobbits would hear. Even the wild things 
in the fields and woods hardly noticed their passing. 

After some time they crossed the Water, west of Hobbiton, 
by a narrow plank-bridge. The stream was there no more than 
a winding black ribbon, bordered with leaning alder-trees. A 
mile or two further south they hastily crossed the great road 
from the Brandywine Bridge; they were now in the Tookland 
and bending south-eastwards they made for the Green Hill 
Country. As they began to climb its first slopes they looked 
back and saw the lamps in Hobbiton far off twinkling in the 
gentle valley of the Water. Soon it disappeared in the folds 
of the darkened land, and was followed by Bywater beside its 
grey pool. When the light of the last farm was far behind, 
peeping among the trees, Frodo turned and waved a hand in 
farewell. 

‘I wonder if I shall ever look down into that valley again,’ 
he said quietly. 

When they had walked for about three hours they rested. 
The night was clear, cool, and starry, but smoke-like wisps 
of mist were creeping up the hill-sides from the streams and 
deep meadows. Thin-clad birches, swaying in a light wind 
above their heads, made a black net against the pale sky. 
They ate a very frugal supper (for hobbits), and then went 
on again. Soon they struck a narrow road, that went rolling 
up and down, fading grey into the darkness ahead: the road 
to Woodhall, and Stock, and the Bucklebury Ferry. It climbed 
away from the main road in the Water-valley, and wound 
over the skirts of the Green Hills towards Woody End, a wild 
corner of the Eastfarthing. 

After a while they plunged into a deeply cloven track 
between tall trees that rustled their dry leaves in the night. It 
was very dark. At first they talked, or hummed a tune softly 
together, being now far away from inquisitive ears. Then they 


94 THE FELLOWSHIP OF THE RING 


marched on in silence, and Pippin began to lag behind. At 
last, as they began to climb a steep slope, he stopped and 
yawned. 

‘I am so sleepy,’ he said, ‘that soon I shall fall down on 
the road. Are you going to sleep on your legs? It is nearly 
midnight.’ 

‘T thought you liked walking in the dark,’ said Frodo. ‘But 
there is no great hurry. Merry expects us some time the day 
after tomorrow; but that leaves us nearly two days more. 
We'll halt at the first likely spot.’ 

“The wind’s in the West,’ said Sam. ‘If we get to the other 
side of this hill, we shall find a spot that is sheltered and snug 
enough, sir. There is a dry fir-wood just ahead, if I remember 
rightly.’ Sam knew the land well within twenty miles of 
Hobbiton, but that was the limit of his geography. 

Just over the top of the hill they came on the patch of 
fir-wood. Leaving the road they went into the deep resin- 
scented darkness of the trees, and gathered dead sticks and 
cones to make a fire. Soon they had a merry crackle of flame 
at the foot of a large fir-tree and they sat round it for a while, 
until they began to nod. Then, each in an angle of the great 
tree’s roots, they curled up in their cloaks and blankets, and 
were soon fast asleep. They set no watch; even Frodo feared 
no danger yet, for they were still in the heart of the Shire. A 
few creatures came and looked at them when the fire had 
died away. A fox passing through the wood on business of 
his own stopped several minutes and sniffed. 

‘Hobbits!’ he thought. ‘Well, what next? I have heard of 
strange doings in this land, but I have seldom heard of a 
hobbit sleeping out of doors under a tree. Three of them! 
There’s something mighty queer behind this.’ He was quite 
right, but he never found out any more about it. 


‘The morning came, pale and clammy. Frodo woke up first, 
and found that a tree-root had made a hole in his back, and 
that his neck was stiff. ‘Walking for pleasure! Why didn’t I 
drive?’ he thought, as he usually did at the beginning of an 


THREE IS COMPANY 95 


expedition. ‘And all my beautiful feather beds are sold to the 
Sackville-Bagginses! These tree-roots would do them good.’ 
He stretched. ‘Wake up, hobbits!’ he cried. ‘It’s a beautiful 
morning.’ 

‘What’s beautiful about it?’ said Pippin, peering over the 
edge of his blanket with one eye. ‘Sam! Get breakfast ready 
for half-past nine! Have you got the bath-water hot?’ 

Sam jumped up, looking rather bleary. ‘No, sir, I haven’t, 
sir!’ he said. 

Frodo stripped the blankets from Pippin and rolled him 
over, and then walked off to the edge of the wood. Away 
eastward the sun was rising red out of the mists that lay thick 
on the world. Touched with gold and red the autumn trees 
seemed to be sailing rootless in a shadowy sea. A little below 
him to the left the road ran down steeply into a hollow and 
disappeared. 

When he returned Sam and Pippin had got a good fire 
going. ‘Water!’ shouted Pippin. ‘Where’s the water?’ 

‘I don’t keep water in my pockets,’ said Frodo. 

‘We thought you had gone to find some,’ said Pippin, busy 
setting out the food, and cups. ‘You had better go now.’ 

“You can come too,’ said Frodo, ‘and bring all the water- 
bottles.’ There was a stream at the foot of the hill. They filled 
their bottles and the small camping kettle at a little fall where 
the water fell a few feet over an outcrop of grey stone. It was 
icy cold; and they spluttered and puffed as they bathed their 
faces and hands. 

When their breakfast was over, and their packs all trussed 
up again, it was after ten o’clock, and the day was beginning 
to turn fine and hot. They went down the slope, and across 
the stream where it dived under the road, and up the next 
slope, and up and down another shoulder of the hills; and by 
that time their cloaks, blankets, water, food, and other gear 
already seemed a heavy burden. 

The day’s march promised to be warm and tiring work. 
After some miles, however, the road ceased to roll up and 
down: it climbed to the top of a steep bank in a weary 


96 THE FELLOWSHIP OF THE RING 


zig-zagging sort of way, and then prepared to go down for 
the last time. In front of them they saw the lower lands dotted 
with small clumps of trees that melted away in the distance 
to a brown woodland haze. They were looking across the 
Woody End towards the Brandywine River. The road wound 
away before them like a piece of string. 

“The road goes on for ever,’ said Pippin; ‘but I can’t with- 
out a rest. It is high time for lunch.’ He sat down on the bank 
at the side of the road and looked away east into the haze, 
beyond which lay the River, and the end of the Shire in which 
he had spent all his life. Sam stood by him. His round eyes 
were wide open — for he was looking across lands he had 
never seen to a new horizon. 

‘Do Elves live in those woods?’ he asked. 

‘Not that I ever heard,’ said Pippin. Frodo was silent. He 
too was gazing eastward along the road, as if he had never 
seen it before. Suddenly he spoke, aloud but as if to himself, 
saying slowly: 


The Road goes ever on and on 
Down from the door where it began. 
Now far ahead the Road has gone, 
And I must follow, if I can, 
Pursuing it with weary feet, 
Until it joins some larger way, 
Where many paths and errands meet. 
And whither then? I cannot say. 


“That sounds like a bit of old Bilbo’s rhyming,’ said Pippin. 
‘Or is it one of your imitations? It does not sound altogether 
encouraging.’ 

‘I don’t know,’ said Frodo. ‘It came to me then, as if I was 
making it up; but I may have heard it long ago. Certainly it 
reminds me very much of Bilbo in the last years, before he 
went away. He used often to say there was only one Road; 
that it was like a great river: its springs were at every doorstep, 
and every path was its tributary. “It’s a dangerous business, 


THREE IS COMPANY 97 


Frodo, going out of your door,” he used to say. ““You step 
into the Road, and if you don’t keep your feet, there is no 
knowing where you might be swept off to. Do you realize 
that this is the very path that goes through Mirkwood, and 
that if you let it, it might take you to the Lonely Mountain 
or even further and to worse places?”’ He used to say that on 
the path outside the front door at Bag End, especially after 
he had been out for a long walk.’ 

‘Well, the Road won’t sweep me anywhere for an hour at 
least,’ said Pippin, unslinging his pack. The others followed 
his example, putting their packs against the bank and their 
legs out into the road. After a rest they had a good lunch, 
and then more rest. 


The sun was beginning to get low and the light of afternoon 
was on the land as they went down the hill. So far they had 
not met a soul on the road. This way was not much used, 
being hardly fit for carts, and there was little traffic to the 
Woody End. They had been jogging along again for an hour 
or more when Sam stopped a moment as if listening. They 
were now on level ground, and the road after much winding 
lay straight ahead through grass-land sprinkled with tall trees, 
outliers of the approaching woods. 

‘IT can hear a pony or a horse coming along the road 
behind,’ said Sam. 

They looked back, but the turn of the road prevented them 
from seeing far. ‘I wonder if that is Gandalf coming after us,’ 
said Frodo; but even as he said it, he had a feeling that it was 
not so, and a sudden desire to hide from the view of the rider 
came over him. 

‘It may not matter much,’ he said apologetically, ‘but 
I would rather not be seen on the road — by anyone. I am 
sick of my doings being noticed and discussed. And if it is 
Gandalf,’ he added as an afterthought, ‘we can give him a 
little surprise, to pay him out for being so late. Let’s get out 
of sight!’ 

The other two ran quickly to the left and down into a little 


98 THE FELLOWSHIP OF THE RING 


hollow not far from the road. There they lay flat. Frodo 
hesitated for a second: curiosity or some other feeling was 
struggling with his desire to hide. The sound of hoofs drew 
nearer. Just in time he threw himself down in a patch of long 
grass behind a tree that overshadowed the road. Then he 
lifted his head and peered cautiously above one of the great 
roots. 

Round the corner came a black horse, no hobbit-pony but 
a full-sized horse; and on it sat a large man, who seemed to 
crouch in the saddle, wrapped in a great black cloak and 
hood, so that only his boots in the high stirrups showed 
below; his face was shadowed and invisible. 

When it reached the tree and was level with Frodo the 
horse stopped. The riding figure sat quite still with its head 
bowed, as if listening. From inside the hood came a noise as 
of someone sniffing to catch an elusive scent; the head turned 
from side to side of the road. 

A sudden unreasoning fear of discovery laid hold of Frodo, 
and he thought of his Ring. He hardly dared to breathe, and 
yet the desire to get it out of his pocket became so strong that 
he began slowly to move his hand. He felt that he had only 
to slip it on, and then he would be safe. The advice of Gandalf 
seemed absurd. Bilbo had used the Ring. ‘And I am still in 
the Shire,’ he thought, as his hand touched the chain on 
which it hung. At that moment the rider sat up, and shook 
the reins. The horse stepped forward, walking slowly at first, 
and then breaking into a quick trot. 

Frodo crawled to the edge of the road and watched the 
rider, until he dwindled into the distance. He could not be 
quite sure, but it seemed to him that suddenly, before it 
passed out of sight, the horse turned aside and went into the 
trees on the right. 

‘Well, I call that very queer, and indeed disturbing,’ said 
Frodo to himself, as he walked towards his companions. 
Pippin and Sam had remained flat in the grass, and had 
seen nothing; so Frodo described the rider and his strange 
behaviour. 


THREE IS COMPANY 99 


‘I can’t say why, but I felt certain he was looking or smelling 
for me; and also I felt certain that I did not want him to 
discover me. I’ve never seen or felt anything like it in the 
Shire before.’ 

‘But what has one of the Big People got to do with us?’ 
said Pippin. ‘And what is he doing in this part of the world?’ 

“There are some Men about,’ said Frodo. ‘Down in the 
Southfarthing they have had trouble with Big People, I 
believe. But I have never heard of anything like this rider. 
I wonder where he comes from.’ 

‘Begging your pardon,’ put in Sam suddenly, ‘I know 
where he comes from. It’s from Hobbiton that this here black 
rider comes, unless there’s more than one. And I know where 
he’s going to.’ 

‘What do you mean?’ said Frodo sharply, looking at him 
in astonishment. ‘Why didn’t you speak up before?’ 

‘I have only just remembered, sir. It was like this: when I 
got back to our hole yesterday evening with the key, my dad, 
he says to me: Hallo, Sam! he says. I thought you were away 
with Mr. Frodo this morning. There’s been a strange customer 
asking for Mr. Baggins of Bag End, and he’s only just gone. P’ve 
sent him on to Bucklebury. Not that I liked the sound of him. He 
seemed mighty put out, when I told him Mr. Baggins had left his 
old home for good. Hissed at me, he did. It gave me quite a 
shudder. What sort of a fellow was he? says I to the Gaffer. I 
don’t know, says he; but he wasn’t a hobbit. He was tall and 
black-like, and he stooped over me. I reckon it was one of the Big 
Folk from foreign parts. He spoke funny. 

‘IT couldn’t stay to hear more, sir, since you were waiting; 
and I didn’t give much heed to it myself. The Gaffer is getting 
old, and more than a bit blind, and it must have been near 
dark when this fellow come up the Hill and found him taking 
the air at the end of our Row. I hope he hasn’t done no harm, 
sir, nor me.’ 

“The Gaffer can’t be blamed anyway,’ said Frodo. ‘As a 
matter of fact I heard him talking to a stranger, who seemed 
to be inquiring for me, and I nearly went and asked him who 


I0O THE FELLOWSHIP OF THE RING 


it was. I wish I had, or you had told me about it before. I 
might have been more careful on the road.’ 

‘Still, there may be no connexion between this rider and 
the Gaffer’s stranger,’ said Pippin. ‘We left Hobbiton secretly 
enough, and I don’t see how he could have followed us.’ 

‘What about the smelling, sir?’ said Sam. ‘And the Gaffer 
said he was a black chap.’ 

‘I wish I had waited for Gandalf,’ Frodo muttered. ‘But 
perhaps it would only have made matters worse.’ 

“Then you know or guess something about this rider?’ said 
Pippin, who had caught the muttered words. 

‘T don’t know, and I would rather not guess,’ said Frodo. 

‘All right, cousin Frodo! You can keep your secret for the 
present, if you want to be mysterious. In the meanwhile what 
are we to do? I should like a bite and a sup, but somehow I 
think we had better move on from here. Your talk of sniffing 
riders with invisible noses has unsettled me.’ 

‘Yes, I think we will move on now,’ said Frodo; ‘but not 
on the road — in case that rider comes back, or another follows 
him. We ought to do a good step more today. Buckland is 
still miles away.’ 


The shadows of the trees were long and thin on the grass, 
as they started off again. They now kept a stone’s throw to 
the left of the road, and kept out of sight of it as much as 
they could. But this hindered them; for the grass was thick 
and tussocky, and the ground uneven, and the trees began to 
draw together into thickets. 

The sun had gone down red behind the hills at their backs, 
and evening was coming on before they came back to the 
road at the end of the long level over which it had run straight 
for some miles. At that point it bent left and went down into 
the lowlands of the Yale making for Stock; but a lane 
branched right, winding through a wood of ancient oak-trees 
on its way to Woodhall. “That is the way for us,’ said Frodo. 

Not far from the road-meeting they came on the huge hulk 
of a tree: it was still alive and had leaves on the small branches 


THREE IS COMPANY IOI 


that it had put out round the broken stumps of its long-fallen 
limbs; but it was hollow, and could be entered by a great 
crack on the side away from the road. The hobbits crept 
inside, and sat there upon a floor of old leaves and decayed 
wood. They rested and had a light meal, talking quietly and 
listening from time to time. 

Twilight was about them as they crept back to the lane. 
The West wind was sighing in the branches. Leaves were 
whispering. Soon the road began to fall gently but steadily 
into the dusk. A star came out above the trees in the darkening 
East before them. They went abreast and in step, to keep up 
their spirits. After a time, as the stars grew thicker and 
brighter, the feeling of disquiet left them, and they no longer 
listened for the sound of hoofs. They began to hum softly, 
as hobbits have a way of doing as they walk along, especially 
when they are drawing near to home at night. With most 
hobbits it is a supper-song or a bed-song; but these hobbits 
hummed a walking-song (though not, of course, without any 
mention of supper and bed). Bilbo Baggins had made the 
words, to a tune that was as old as the hills, and taught it to 
Frodo as they walked in the lanes of the Water-valley and 
talked about Adventure. 


Upon the hearth the fire ts red, 
Beneath the roof there is a bed; 
But not yet weary are our feet, 
Sull round the corner we may meet 
A sudden tree or standing stone 
That none have seen but we alone. 
Tree and flower and leaf and grass, 
Let them pass! Let them pass! 
Fill and water under sky, 
Pass them by! Pass them by! 


Still round the corner there may wait 
A new road or a secret gate, 
And though we pass them by today, 


102 THE FELLOWSHIP OF THE RING 


Tomorrow we may come this way 
And take the hidden paths that run 
Towards the Moon or to the Sun. 
Apple, thorn, and nut and sloe, 
Let them go! Let them go! 
Sand and stone and pool and dell, 
Fare you well! Fare you well! 


Home 1s behind, the world ahead, 

And there are many paths to tread 

Through shadows to the edge of night, 

Until the stars are all alight. 

Then world behind and home ahead, 

We'll wander back to home and bed. 
Mist and twilight, cloud and shade, 
Away shall fade! Away shall fade! 
Fire and lamp, and meat and bread, 
And then to bed! And then to bed! 


The song ended. ‘And now to bed! And now to bed!’ sang 
Pippin in a high voice. 

‘Hush!’ said Frodo. ‘I think I hear hoofs again.’ 

They stopped suddenly and stood as silent as tree- 
shadows, listening. There was a sound of hoofs in the lane, 
some way behind, but coming slow and clear down the wind. 
Quickly and quietly they slipped off the path, and ran into 
the deeper shade under the oak-trees. 

‘Don’t let us go too far!’ said Frodo. ‘I don’t want to be 
seen, but I want to see if it is another Black Rider.’ 

‘Very well!’ said Pippin. ‘But don’t forget the sniffing!’ 

The hoofs drew nearer. They had no time to find any 
hiding-place better than the general darkness under the trees; 
Sam and Pippin crouched behind a large tree-bole, while 
Frodo crept back a few yards towards the lane. It showed 
grey and pale, a line of fading light through the wood. Above 
it the stars were thick in the dim sky, but there was no moon. 

The sound of hoofs stopped. As Frodo watched he saw 


THREE IS COMPANY 103 


something dark pass across the lighter space between two 
trees, and then halt. It looked like the black shade of a horse 
led by a smaller black shadow. The black shadow stood close 
to the point where they had left the path, and it swayed from 
side to side. Frodo thought he heard the sound of snuffling. 
The shadow bent to the ground, and then began to crawl 
towards him. 

Once more the desire to slip on the Ring came over Frodo; 
but this time it was stronger than before. So strong that, 
almost before he realized what he was doing, his hand was 
groping in his pocket. But at that moment there came a sound 
like mingled song and laughter. Clear voices rose and fell 
in the starlit air. The black shadow straightened up and 
retreated. It climbed on to the shadowy horse and seemed to 
vanish across the lane into the darkness on the other side. 
Frodo breathed again. 

‘Elves!’ exclaimed Sam in a hoarse whisper. ‘Elves, sir!’ He 
would have burst out of the trees and dashed off towards the 
voices, if they had not pulled him back. 

“Yes, it is Elves,’ said Frodo. ‘One can meet them some- 
times in the Woody End. They don’t live in the Shire, but 
they wander into it in spring and autumn, out of their own 
lands away beyond the Tower Hills. I am thankful that they 
do! You did not see, but that Black Rider stopped just here 
and was actually crawling towards us when the song began. 
As soon as he heard the voices he slipped away.’ 

‘What about the Elves?’ said Sam, too excited to trouble 
about the rider. ‘Can’t we go and see them?’ 

‘Listen! They are coming this way,’ said Frodo. “We have 
only to wait.’ 

The singing drew nearer. One clear voice rose now above 
the others. It was singing in the fair elven-tongue, of which 
Frodo knew only a little, and the others knew nothing. Yet 
the sound blending with the melody seemed to shape itself 
in their thought into words which they only partly under- 
stood. This was the song as Frodo heard it: 


104 THE FELLOWSHIP OF THE RING 


Snow-white! Snow-white! O Lady clear! 
O Queen beyond the Western Seas! 

O Light to us that wander here 
Amid the world of woven trees! 


Gilthoniel! O Elbereth! 
Clear are thy eyes and bright thy breath! 
Snow-white! Snow-white! We sing to thee 
In a far land beyond the Sea. 


O stars that in the Sunless Year 
With shining hand by her were sown, 
In windy fields now bright and clear 
We see your silver blossom blown! 


O Elbereth! Gilthoniel! 
We still remember, we who dwell 
In this far land beneath the trees, 
Thy starlight on the Western Seas. 


The song ended. “These are High Elves! They spoke the 
name of Elbereth!’ said Frodo in amazement. ‘Few of that 
fairest folk are ever seen in the Shire. Not many now remain 
in Middle-earth, east of the Great Sea. This is indeed a 
strange chance!’ 

The hobbits sat in shadow by the wayside. Before long the 
Elves came down the lane towards the valley. They passed 
slowly, and the hobbits could see the starlight glimmering on 
their hair and in their eyes. They bore no lights, yet as they 
walked a shimmer, like the light of the moon above the rim 
of the hills before it rises, seemed to fall about their feet. They 
were now silent, and as the last Elf passed he turned and 
looked towards the hobbits and laughed. 

‘Hail, Frodo!’ he cried. ‘You are abroad late. Or are you 
perhaps lost?’ Then he called aloud to the others, and all the 
company stopped and gathered round. 

“This is indeed wonderful!’ they said. “Three hobbits in a 


THREE IS COMPANY 105 


wood at night! We have not seen such a thing since Bilbo 
went away. What is the meaning of it?’ 

“The meaning of it, fair people,’ said Frodo, ‘is simply that 
we seem to be going the same way as you are. I like walking 
under the stars. But I would welcome your company.’ 

‘But we have no need of other company, and hobbits are 
so dull,’ they laughed. ‘And how do you know that we go the 
same way as you, for you do not know whither we are going?’ 

‘And how do you know my name?’ asked Frodo in return. 

‘We know many things,’ they said. ‘We have seen you 
often before with Bilbo, though you may not have seen us.’ 

‘Who are you, and who is your lord?’ asked Frodo. 

‘I am Gildor,’ answered their leader, the Elf who had first 
hailed him. ‘Gildor Inglorion of the House of Finrod. We are 
Exiles, and most of our kindred have long ago departed and 
we too are now only tarrying here a while, ere we return over 
the Great Sea. But some of our kinsfolk dwell still in peace 
in Rivendell. Come now, Frodo, tell us what you are doing? 
For we see that there is some shadow of fear upon you.’ 

‘O Wise People!’ interrupted Pippin eagerly. “Tell us about 
the Black Riders!’ 

‘Black Riders?’ they said in low voices. ‘Why do you ask 
about Black Riders?’ 

‘Because two Black Riders have overtaken us today, or one 
has done so twice,’ said Pippin; ‘only a little while ago he 
slipped away as you drew near.’ 

The Elves did not answer at once, but spoke together softly 
in their own tongue. At length Gildor turned to the hobbits. 
‘We will not speak of this here,’ he said. ‘We think you had 
best come now with us. It is not our custom, but for this time 
we will take you on our road, and you shall lodge with us 
tonight, if you will.’ 

‘O Fair Folk! This is good fortune beyond my hope,’ said 
Pippin. Sam was speechless. ‘I thank you indeed, Gildor 
Inglorion,’ said Frodo bowing. ‘Elen sila limenn’ omentielvo, 
a star shines on the hour of our meeting,’ he added in the 
High-elven speech. 


106 THE FELLOWSHIP OF THE RING 


‘Be careful, friends!’ cried Gildor laughing. ‘Speak no 
secrets! Here is a scholar in the Ancient Tongue. Bilbo was 
a good master. Hail, Elf-friend!’ he said, bowing to Frodo. 
‘Come now with your friends and join our company! You 
had best walk in the middle so that you may not stray. You 
may be weary before we halt.’ 

‘Why? Where are you going?’ asked Frodo. 

‘For tonight we go to the woods on the hills above Wood- 
hall. It is some miles, but you shall have rest at the end of it, 
and it will shorten your journey tomorrow.’ 

They now marched on again in silence, and passed like 
shadows and faint lights: for Elves (even more than hobbits) 
could walk when they wished without sound or footfall. 
Pippin soon began to feel sleepy, and staggered once or twice; 
but each time a tall Elf at his side put out his arm and saved 
him from a fall. Sam walked along at Frodo’s side, as if in a 
dream, with an expression on his face half of fear and half of 
astonished joy. 


The woods on either side became denser; the trees were 
now younger and thicker; and as the lane went lower, running 
down into a fold of the hills, there were many deep brakes of 
hazel on the rising slopes at either hand. At last the Elves 
turned aside from the path. A green ride lay almost unseen 
through the thickets on the right; and this they followed as it 
wound away back up the wooded slopes on to the top of 
a shoulder of the hills that stood out into the lower land 
of the river-valley. Suddenly they came out of the shadow 
of the trees, and before them lay a wide space of grass, 
grey under the night. On three sides the woods pressed 
upon it; but eastward the ground fell steeply and the tops 
of the dark trees, growing at the bottom of the slope, were 
below their feet. Beyond, the low lands lay dim and flat 
under the stars. Nearer at hand a few lights twinkled in the 
village of Woodhall. 

The Elves sat on the grass and spoke together in soft voices; 
they seemed to take no further notice of the hobbits. Frodo 


THREE IS COMPANY 107 


and his companions wrapped themselves in cloaks and 
blankets, and drowsiness stole over them. The night grew on, 
and the lights in the valley went out. Pippin fell asleep, 
pillowed on a green hillock. 

Away high in the East swung Remmirath, the Netted Stars, 
and slowly above the mists red Borgil rose, glowing like a 
jewel of fire. Then by some shift of airs all the mist was drawn 
away like a veil, and there leaned up, as he climbed over the 
rim of the world, the Swordsman of the Sky, Menelvagor 
with his shining belt. The Elves all burst into song. Suddenly 
under the trees a fire sprang up with a red light. 

‘Come!’ the Elves called to the hobbits. ‘Come! Now is the 
time for speech and merriment!’ 

Pippin sat up and rubbed his eyes. He shivered. “There is 
a fire in the hall, and food for hungry guests,’ said an Elf 
standing before him. 

At the south end of the greensward there was an opening. 
There the green floor ran on into the wood, and formed a 
wide space like a hall, roofed by the boughs of trees. Their 
great trunks ran like pillars down each side. In the middle 
there was a wood-fire blazing, and upon the tree-pillars 
torches with lights of gold and silver were burning steadily. 
The Elves sat round the fire upon the grass or upon the sawn 
rings of old trunks. Some went to and fro bearing cups and 
pouring drink; others brought food on heaped plates and 
dishes. 

“This is poor fare,’ they said to the hobbits; ‘for we are 
lodging in the greenwood far from our halls. If ever you are 
our guests at home, we will treat you better.’ 

‘It seems to me good enough for a birthday-party,’ said 
Frodo. 

Pippin afterwards recalled little of either food or drink, for 
his mind was filled with the light upon the elf-faces, and the 
sound of voices so various and so beautiful that he felt in a 
waking dream. But he remembered that there was bread, 
surpassing the savour of a fair white loaf to one who is starv- 
ing; and fruits sweet as wildberries and richer than the tended 


108 THE FELLOWSHIP OF THE RING 


fruits of gardens; he drained a cup that was filled with a 
fragrant draught, cool as a clear fountain, golden as a summer 
afternoon. 

Sam could never describe in words, nor picture clearly to 
himself, what he felt or thought that night, though it remained 
in his memory as one of the chief events of his life. The 
nearest he ever got was to say: ‘Well, sir, if I could grow 
apples like that, I would call myself a gardener. But it was 
the singing that went to my heart, if you know what I mean.’ 

Frodo sat, eating, drinking, and talking with delight; but 
his mind was chiefly on the words spoken. He knew a little 
of the elf-speech and listened eagerly. Now and again he 
spoke to those that served him and thanked them in their 
own language. They smiled at him and said laughing: ‘Here 
is a jewel among hobbits!’ 

After a while Pippin fell fast asleep, and was lifted up and 
borne away to a bower under the trees; there he was laid 
upon a soft bed and slept the rest of the night away. Sam 
refused to leave his master. When Pippin had gone, he came 
and sat curled up at Frodo’s feet, where at last he nodded 
and closed his eyes. Frodo remained long awake, talking with 
Gildor. 


They spoke of many things, old and new, and Frodo ques- 
tioned Gildor much about happenings in the wide world 
outside the Shire. The tidings were mostly sad and ominous: 
of gathering darkness, the wars of Men, and the flight of the 
Elves. At last Frodo asked the question that was nearest to 
his heart: 

“Tell me, Gildor, have you ever seen Bilbo since he left us?’ 

Gildor smiled. ‘Yes,’ he answered. “Twice. He said farewell 
to us on this very spot. But I saw him once again, far from 
here.’ He would say no more about Bilbo, and Frodo fell 
silent. 

“You do not ask me or tell me much that concerns yourself, 
Frodo,’ said Gildor. ‘But I already know a little, and I can 
read more in your face and in the thought behind your ques- 


THREE IS COMPANY 109 


tions. You are leaving the Shire, and yet you doubt that you 
will find what you seek, or accomplish what you intend, or 
that you will ever return. Is not that so?’ 

‘It is,’ said Frodo; ‘but I thought my going was a secret 
known only to Gandalf and my faithful Sam.’ He looked 
down at Sam, who was snoring gently. 

“The secret will not reach the Enemy from us,’ said Gildor. 

“The Enemy?’ said Frodo. “Then you know why I am 
leaving the Shire?’ 

‘I do not know for what reason the Enemy is pursuing 
you,’ answered Gildor; ‘but I perceive that he is — strange 
indeed though that seems to me. And I warn you that peril 
is now both before you and behind you, and upon either 
side.’ 

“You mean the Riders? I feared that they were servants of 
the Enemy. What are the Black Riders?’ 

‘Has Gandalf told you nothing?’ 

‘Nothing about such creatures.’ 

“Then I think it is not for me to say more — lest terror 
should keep you from your journey. For it seems to me that 
you have set out only just in time, if indeed you are in time. 
You must now make haste, and neither stay nor turn back; 
for the Shire is no longer any protection to you.’ 

‘I cannot imagine what information could be more terrify- 
ing than your hints and warnings,’ exclaimed Frodo. ‘I knew 
that danger lay ahead, of course; but I did not expect to meet 
it in our own Shire. Can’t a hobbit walk from the Water to 
the River in peace?’ 

‘But it is not your own Shire,’ said Gildor. ‘Others dwelt 
here before hobbits were; and others will dwell here again 
when hobbits are no more. The wide world is all about you: 
you can fence yourselves in, but you cannot for ever fence 
it out.’ 

‘I know — and yet it has always seemed so safe and familiar. 
What can I do now? My plan was to leave the Shire secretly, 
and make my way to Rivendell; but now my footsteps are 
dogged, before ever I get to Buckland.’ 


IIO THE FELLOWSHIP OF THE RING 


‘T think you should still follow that plan,’ said Gildor. ‘I do 
not think the Road will prove too hard for your courage. But 
if you desire clearer counsel, you should ask Gandalf. I do 
not know the reason for your flight, and therefore I do not 
know by what means your pursuers will assail you. These 
things Gandalf must know. I suppose that you will see him 
before you leave the Shire?’ 

‘Thope so. But that is another thing that makes me anxious. 
I have been expecting Gandalf for many days. He was to 
have come to Hobbiton at the latest two nights ago; but he 
has never appeared. Now I am wondering what can have 
happened. Should I wait for him?’ 

Gildor was silent for a moment. ‘I do not like this news,’ 
he said at last. “That Gandalf should be late, does not bode 
well. But it is said: Do not meddle in the affairs of Wizards, for 
they are subtle and quick to anger. The choice is yours: to go 
or wait.’ 

‘And it is also said,’ answered Frodo: ‘Go not to the Elves 
for counsel, for they will say both no and yes.’ 

‘Is it indeed?’ laughed Gildor. ‘Elves seldom give un- 
guarded advice, for advice is a dangerous gift, even from the 
wise to the wise, and all courses may run ill. But what would 
you? You have not told me all concerning yourself; and how 
then shall I choose better than you? But if you demand advice, 
I will for friendship’s sake give it. I think you should now 
go at once, without delay; and if Gandalf does not come 
before you set out, then I also advise this: do not go alone. 
‘Take such friends as are trusty and willing. Now you should 
be grateful, for I do not give this counsel gladly. ‘The Elves 
have their own labours and their own sorrows, and they are 
little concerned with the ways of hobbits, or of any other 
creatures upon earth. Our paths cross theirs seldom, by 
chance or purpose. In this meeting there may be more than 
chance; but the purpose is not clear to me, and I fear to say 
too much.’ 

‘I am deeply grateful,’ said Frodo; ‘but I wish you would 
tell me plainly what the Black Riders are. If I take your advice 


THREE IS COMPANY II! 


I may not see Gandalf for a long while, and I ought to know 
what is the danger that pursues me.’ 

‘Is it not enough to know that they are servants of the 
Enemy?’ answered Gildor. ‘Flee them! Speak no words to 
them! They are deadly. Ask no more of me! But my heart 
forbodes that, ere all is ended, you, Frodo son of Drogo, will 
know more of these fell things than Gildor Inglorion. May 
Elbereth protect you!’ 

‘But where shall I find courage?’ asked Frodo. “That is 
what I chiefly need.’ 

‘Courage is found in unlikely places,’ said Gildor. ‘Be of 
good hope! Sleep now! In the morning we shall have gone; but 
we will send our messages through the lands. The Wandering 
Companies shall know of your journey, and those that have 
power for good shall be on the watch. I name you Elf-friend; 
and may the stars shine upon the end of your road! Seldom 
have we had such delight in strangers, and it is fair to hear 
words of the Ancient Speech from the lips of other wanderers 
in the world.’ 

Frodo felt sleep coming upon him, even as Gildor finished 
speaking. ‘I will sleep now,’ he said; and the Elf led him to a 
bower beside Pippin, and he threw himself upon a bed and 
fell at once into a dreamless slumber. 


Chapter 4 


A SHORT CUT TO MUSHROOMS 


In the morning Frodo woke refreshed. He was lying in a 
bower made by a living tree with branches laced and drooping 
to the ground; his bed was of fern and grass, deep and soft 
and strangely fragrant. The sun was shining through the 
fluttering leaves, which were still green upon the tree. He 
jumped up and went out. 

Sam was sitting on the grass near the edge of the wood. 
Pippin was standing studying the sky and weather. There 
was no sign of the Elves. 

“They have left us fruit and drink, and bread,’ said Pippin. 
‘Come and have your breakfast. The bread tastes almost as 
good as it did last night. I did not want to leave you any, but 
Sam insisted.’ 

Frodo sat down beside Sam and began to eat. “What is the 
plan for today?’ asked Pippin. 

“To walk to Bucklebury as quickly as possible,’ answered 
Frodo, and gave his attention to the food. 

‘Do you think we shall see anything of those Riders?’ asked 
Pippin cheerfully. Under the morning sun the prospect of 
seeing a whole troop of them did not seem very alarming to 
him. 

“Yes, probably,’ said Frodo, not liking the reminder. ‘But 
I hope to get across the river without their seeing us.’ 

‘Did you find out anything about them from Gildor?’ 

‘Not much — only hints and riddles,’ said Frodo evasively. 

‘Did you ask about the sniffing?’ 

‘We didn’t discuss it,’ said Frodo with his mouth full. 

“You should have. I am sure it is very important.’ 

‘In that case Iam sure Gildor would have refused to explain 
it,’ said Frodo sharply. ‘And now leave me in peace for a bit! 


A SHORT CUT TO MUSHROOMS II3 


I don’t want to answer a string of questions while I am eating. 
I want to think!’ 

‘Good heavens!’ said Pippin. ‘At breakfast?’ He walked 
away towards the edge of the green. 

From Frodo’s mind the bright morning — treacherously 
bright, he thought — had not banished the fear of pursuit; and 
he pondered the words of Gildor. The merry voice of Pippin 
came to him. He was running on the green turf and singing. 

‘No! I could not!’ he said to himself. ‘It is one thing to take 
my young friends walking over the Shire with me, until we 
are hungry and weary, and food and bed are sweet. To take 
them into exile, where hunger and weariness may have no 
cure, is quite another — even if they are willing to come. The 
inheritance is mine alone. I don’t think I ought even to take 
Sam.’ He looked at Sam Gamgee, and discovered that Sam 
was watching him. 

‘Well, Sam!’ he said. “What about it? Iam leaving the Shire 
as soon as ever I can — in fact I have made up my mind now 
not even to wait a day at Crickhollow, if it can be helped.’ 

‘Very good, sir!’ 

“You still mean to come with me?’ 

‘T do.’ 

‘It is going to be very dangerous, Sam. It is already danger- 
ous. Most likely neither of us will come back.’ 

‘If you don’t come back, sir, then I shan’t, that’s certain,’ 
said Sam. ‘Don’t you leave him! they said to me. Leave him! 
I said. I never mean to. I am going with him, tf he climbs to the 
Moon; and tf any of those Black Riders try to stop him, they'll 
have Sam Gamgee to reckon with, I said. They laughed.’ 

‘Who are they, and what are you talking about?’ 

“The Elves, sir. We had some talk last night; and they 
seemed to know you were going away, so I didn’t see the use 
of denying it. Wonderful folk, Elves, sir! Wonderful!’ 

“They are,’ said Frodo. ‘Do you like them still, now you 
have had a closer view?’ 

“They seem a bit above my likes and dislikes, so to speak,’ 
answered Sam slowly. ‘It don’t seem to matter what I think 


II4 THE FELLOWSHIP OF THE RING 


about them. They are quite different from what I expected — 
so old and young, and so gay and sad, as it were.’ 

Frodo looked at Sam rather startled, half expecting to see 
some outward sign of the odd change that seemed to have 
come over him. It did not sound like the voice of the old Sam 
Gamgee that he thought he knew. But it looked like the old 
Sam Gamgee sitting there, except that his face was unusually 
thoughtful. 

‘Do you feel any need to leave the Shire now — now that 
your wish to see them has come true already?’ he asked. 

‘Yes, sir. I don’t know how to say it, but after last night 
I feel different. I seem to see ahead, in a kind of way. I know 
we are going to take a very long road, into darkness; but 
I know I can’t turn back. It isn’t to see Elves now, nor 
dragons, nor mountains, that I want — I don’t rightly know 
what I want: but I have something to do before the end, and 
it lies ahead, not in the Shire. I must see it through, sir, if 
you understand me.’ 

‘T don’t altogether. But I understand that Gandalf chose 
me a good companion. I am content. We will go together.’ 

Frodo finished his breakfast in silence. Then standing up 
he looked over the land ahead, and called to Pippin. 

‘All ready to start?’ he said as Pippin ran up. ‘We must be 
getting off at once. We slept late; and there are a good many 
miles to go.’ 

“You slept late, you mean,’ said Pippin. ‘I was up long 
before; and we are only waiting for you to finish eating and 
thinking.’ 

‘T have finished both now. And I am going to make for 
Bucklebury Ferry as quickly as possible. I am not going out 
of the way, back to the road we left last night: I am going to 
cut straight across country from here.’ 

“Then you are going to fly,’ said Pippin. ‘You won’t cut 
straight on foot anywhere in this country.’ 

‘We can cut straighter than the road anyway,’ answered 
Frodo. “The Ferry is east from Woodhall; but the hard road 
curves away to the left — you can see a bend of it away north 


A SHORT CUT TO MUSHROOMS II5 


over there. It goes round the north end of the Marish so as 
to strike the causeway from the Bridge above Stock. But that 
is miles out of the way. We could save a quarter of the 
distance if we made a line for the Ferry from where we stand.’ 

‘Short cuts make long delays,’ argued Pippin. “The country 
is rough round here, and there are bogs and all kinds of 
difficulties down in the Marish — I know the land in these 
parts. And if you are worrying about Black Riders, I can’t 
see that it is any worse meeting them on a road than in a 
wood or a field.’ 

‘It is less easy to find people in the woods and fields,’ 
answered Frodo. ‘And if you are supposed to be on the road, 
there is some chance that you will be looked for on the road 
and not off it.’ 

‘All right!’ said Pippin. ‘I will follow you into every bog 
and ditch. But it is hard! I had counted on passing the Golden 
Perch at Stock before sundown. The best beer in the East- 
farthing, or used to be: it is a long time since I tasted it.’ 

“That settles it!’ said Frodo. ‘Short cuts make delays, but 
inns make longer ones. At all costs we must keep you away 
from the Golden Perch. We want to get to Bucklebury before 
dark. What do you say, Sam?’ 

‘T will go along with you, Mr. Frodo,’ said Sam (in spite 
of private misgivings and a deep regret for the best beer in 
the Eastfarthing). 

“Then if we are going to toil through bog and briar, let’s 
go now!’ said Pippin. 


It was already nearly as hot as it had been the day before; 
but clouds were beginning to come up from the West. It 
looked likely to turn to rain. The hobbits scrambled down a 
steep green bank and plunged into the thick trees below. 
Their course had been chosen to leave Woodhall to their left, 
and to cut slanting through the woods that clustered along 
the eastern side of the hills, until they reached the flats 
beyond. Then they could make straight for the Ferry over 
country that was open, except for a few ditches and fences. 


116 THE FELLOWSHIP OF THE RING 


Frodo reckoned they had eighteen miles to go ina straight line. 

He soon found that the thicket was closer and more tangled 
than it had appeared. There were no paths in the under- 
growth, and they did not get on very fast. When they had 
struggled to the bottom of the bank, they found a stream 
running down from the hills behind in a deeply dug bed with 
steep slippery sides overhung with brambles. Most incon- 
veniently it cut across the line they had chosen. They could 
not jump over it, nor indeed get across it at all without getting 
wet, scratched, and muddy. They halted, wondering what to 
do. ‘First check!’ said Pippin, smiling grimly. 

Sam Gamgee looked back. Through an opening in the 
trees he caught a glimpse of the top of the green bank from 
which they had climbed down. 

‘Look!’ he said, clutching Frodo by the arm. They all 
looked, and on the edge high above them they saw against 
the sky a horse standing. Beside it stooped a black figure. 

They at once gave up any idea of going back. Frodo led 
the way, and plunged quickly into the thick bushes beside the 
stream. ‘Whew!’ he said to Pippin. ‘We were both right! The 
short cut has gone crooked already; but we got under cover 
only just in time. You’ve got sharp ears, Sam: can you hear 
anything coming?’ 

They stood still, almost holding their breath as they 
listened; but there was no sound of pursuit. ‘I don’t fancy 
he would try bringing his horse down that bank,’ said Sam. 
‘But I guess he knows we came down it. We had better be 
going on.’ 

Going on was not altogether easy. They had packs to carry, 
and the bushes and brambles were reluctant to let them 
through. They were cut off from the wind by the ridge 
behind, and the air was still and stuffy. When they forced 
their way at last into more open ground, they were hot and 
tired and very scratched, and they were also no longer certain 
of the direction in which they were going. The banks of the 
stream sank, as it reached the levels and became broader and 
shallower, wandering off towards the Marish and the River. 


A SHORT CUT TO MUSHROOMS II7 


‘Why, this is the Stock-brook!’ said Pippin. ‘If we are going 
to try and get back on to our course, we must cross at once 
and bear right.’ 

They waded the stream, and hurried over a wide open 
space, rush-grown and treeless, on the further side. Beyond 
that they came again to a belt of trees: tall oaks, for the most 
part, with here and there an elm tree or an ash. The ground 
was fairly level, and there was little undergrowth; but the 
trees were too close for them to see far ahead. The leaves 
blew upwards in sudden gusts of wind, and spots of rain 
began to fall from the overcast sky. Then the wind died away 
and the rain came streaming down. They trudged along as 
fast as they could, over patches of grass, and through thick 
drifts of old leaves; and all about them the rain pattered and 
trickled. They did not talk, but kept glancing back, and from 
side to side. 

After half an hour Pippin said: ‘I hope we have not turned 
too much towards the south, and are not walking longwise 
through this wood! It is not a very broad belt — I should have 
said no more than a mile at the widest — and we ought to 
have been through it by now.’ 

‘Tt is no good our starting to go in zig-zags,’ said Frodo. 
“That won’t mend matters. Let us keep on as we are going! 
I am not sure that I want to come out into the open yet.’ 


They went on for perhaps another couple of miles. Then 
the sun gleamed out of ragged clouds again and the rain 
lessened. It was now past mid-day, and they felt it was high 
time for lunch. They halted under an elm tree: its leaves 
though fast turning yellow were still thick, and the ground at 
its feet was fairly dry and sheltered. When they came to make 
their meal, they found that the Elves had filled their bottles 
with a clear drink, pale golden in colour: it had the scent of 
a honey made of many flowers, and was wonderfully refresh- 
ing. Very soon they were laughing, and snapping their fingers 
at rain, and at Black Riders. The last few miles, they felt, 
would soon be behind them. 


118 THE FELLOWSHIP OF THE RING 


Frodo propped his back against the tree-trunk, and closed 
his eyes. Sam and Pippin sat near, and they began to hum, 
and then to sing softly: 


Ho! Ho! Ho! to the bottle I go 

To heal my heart and drown my woe. 
Rain may fall and wind may blow, 
And many miles be still to go, 

But under a tall tree I will he, 

And let the clouds go sailing by. 


Ho! Ho! Ho! they began again louder. They stopped short 
suddenly. Frodo sprang to his feet. A long-drawn wail came 
down the wind, like the cry of some evil and lonely creature. 
It rose and fell, and ended on a high piercing note. Even as 
they sat and stood, as if suddenly frozen, it was answered by 
another cry, fainter and further off, but no less chilling to the 
blood. There was then a silence, broken only by the sound 
of the wind in the leaves. 

‘And what do you think that was?’ Pippin asked at last, 
trying to speak lightly, but quavering a little. ‘If it was a bird, 
it was one that I never heard in the Shire before.’ 

‘It was not bird or beast,’ said Frodo. ‘It was a call, or a 
signal — there were words in that cry, though I could not 
catch them. But no hobbit has such a voice.’ 

No more was said about it. They were all thinking of the 
Riders, but no one spoke of them. They were now reluctant 
either to stay or go on; but sooner or later they had got to get 
across the open country to the Ferry, and it was best to go 
sooner and in daylight. In a few moments they had shoul- 
dered their packs again and were off. 


Before long the wood came to a sudden end. Wide grass- 
lands stretched before them. They now saw that they had, in 
fact, turned too much to the south. Away over the flats they 
could glimpse the low hill of Bucklebury across the River, 
but it was now to their left. Creeping cautiously out from the 


A SHORT CUT TO MUSHROOMS II9Q 


edge of the trees, they set off across the open as quickly as 
they could. 

At first they felt afraid, away from the shelter of the wood. 
Far back behind them stood the high place where they had 
breakfasted. Frodo half expected to see the small distant 
figure of a horseman on the ridge dark against the sky; but 
there was no sign of one. The sun escaping from the breaking 
clouds, as it sank towards the hills they had left, was now 
shining brightly again. Their fear left them, though they still 
felt uneasy. But the land became steadily more tame and 
well-ordered. Soon they came into well-tended fields and 
meadows: there were hedges and gates and dikes for drainage. 
Everything seemed quiet and peaceful, just an ordinary 
corner of the Shire. Their spirits rose with every step. The 
line of the River grew nearer; and the Black Riders began to 
seem like phantoms of the woods now left far behind. 

They passed along the edge of a huge turnip-field, and 
came to a stout gate. Beyond it a rutted lane ran between low 
well-laid hedges towards a distant clump of trees. Pippin 
stopped. 

‘T know these fields and this gate!’ he said. “This is Bam- 
furlong, old Farmer Maggot’s land. That’s his farm away 
there in the trees.’ 

‘One trouble after another!’ said Frodo, looking nearly as 
much alarmed as if Pippin had declared the lane was the 
slot leading to a dragon’s den. The others looked at him in 
surprise. 

‘What’s wrong with old Maggot?’ asked Pippin. ‘He’s a 
good friend to all the Brandybucks. Of course he’s a terror 
to trespassers, and keeps ferocious dogs — but after all, folk 
down here are near the border and have to be more on their 
guard.’ 

‘I know,’ said Frodo. ‘But all the same,’ he added with a 
shamefaced laugh, ‘I am terrified of him and his dogs. I have 
avoided his farm for years and years. He caught me several 
times trespassing after mushrooms, when I was a youngster 
at Brandy Hall. On the last occasion he beat me, and then 


I20 THE FELLOWSHIP OF THE RING 


took me and showed me to his dogs. “‘See, lads,”’ he said, 
“next time this young varmint sets foot on my land, you can 
eat him. Now see him off!’ They chased me all the way to 
the Ferry. I have never got over the fright — though I daresay 
the beasts knew their business and would not really have 
touched me.’ 

Pippin laughed. ‘Well, it’s time you made it up. Especially 
if you are coming back to live in Buckland. Old Maggot is 
really a stout fellow — if you leave his mushrooms alone. Let’s 
get into the lane and then we shan’t be trespassing. If we 
meet him, I'll do the talking. He is a friend of Merry’s, and I 
used to come here with him a good deal at one time.’ 


They went along the lane, until they saw the thatched roofs 
of a large house and farm-buildings peeping out among the 
trees ahead. The Maggots, and the Puddifoots of Stock, and 
most of the inhabitants of the Marish, were house-dwellers; 
and this farm was stoutly built of brick and had a high wall 
all round it. There was a wide wooden gate opening out of 
the wall into the lane. 

Suddenly as they drew nearer a terrific baying and barking 
broke out, and a loud voice was heard shouting: ‘Grip! Fang! 
Wolf! Come on, lads!’ 

Frodo and Sam stopped dead, but Pippin walked on a few 
paces. The gate opened and three huge dogs came pelting 
out into the lane, and dashed towards the travellers, barking 
fiercely. They took no notice of Pippin; but Sam shrank 
against the wall, while two wolvish-looking dogs sniffed at 
him suspiciously, and snarled if he moved. The largest and 
most ferocious of the three halted in front of Frodo, bristling 
and growling. 

Through the gate there now appeared a broad thick-set 
hobbit with a round red face. ‘Hallo! Hallo! And who may 
you be, and what may you be wanting?’ he asked. 

‘Good afternoon, Mr. Maggot!’ said Pippin. 

The farmer looked at him closely. “Well, if it isn’t Master 
Pippin — Mr. Peregrin Took, I should say!’ he cried, changing 


A SHORT CUT TO MUSHROOMS I21 


from a scowl to a grin. ‘It’s a long time since I saw you round 
here. It’s lucky for you that I know you. I was just going out 
to set my dogs on any strangers. There are some funny things 
going on today. Of course, we do get queer folk wandering 
in these parts at times. Too near the River,’ he said, shaking 
his head. ‘But this fellow was the most outlandish I have ever 
set eyes on. He won’t cross my land without leave a second 
time, not if I can stop it.’ 

‘What fellow do you mean?’ asked Pippin. 

“Then you haven’t seen him?’ said the farmer. ‘He went 
up the lane towards the causeway not a long while back. He 
was a funny customer and asking funny questions. But per- 
haps you’ll come along inside, and we’ll pass the news more 
comfortable. ’ve a drop of good ale on tap, if you and your 
friends are willing, Mr. Took.’ 

It seemed plain that the farmer would tell them more, if 
allowed to do it in his own time and fashion, so they all 
accepted the invitation. ‘What about the dogs?’ asked Frodo 
anxiously. 

The farmer laughed. “Chey won’t harm you — not unless I 
tell °em to. Here, Grip! Fang! Heel!’ he cried. ‘Heel, Wolf!’ 
To the relief of Frodo and Sam, the dogs walked away and 
let them go free. 

Pippin introduced the other two to the farmer. ‘Mr. Frodo 
Baggins,’ he said. ‘You may not remember him, but he used 
to live at Brandy Hall.’ At the name Baggins the farmer 
started, and gave Frodo a sharp glance. For a moment Frodo 
thought that the memory of stolen mushrooms had been 
aroused, and that the dogs would be told to see him off. But 
Farmer Maggot took him by the arm. 

‘Well, if that isn’t queerer than ever!’ he exclaimed. ‘Mr. 
Baggins is it? Come inside! We must have a talk.’ 

They went into the farmer’s kitchen, and sat by the wide 
fire-place. Mrs. Maggot brought out beer in a huge jug, and 
filled four large mugs. It was a good brew, and Pippin found 
himself more than compensated for missing the Golden Perch. 
Sam sipped his beer suspiciously. He had a natural mistrust 


122 THE FELLOWSHIP OF THE RING 


of the inhabitants of other parts of the Shire; and also he was 
not disposed to be quick friends with anyone who had beaten 
his master, however long ago. 

After a few remarks about the weather and the agricultural 
prospects (which were no worse than usual), Farmer Maggot 
put down his mug and looked at them all in turn. 

‘Now, Mr. Peregrin,’ he said, ‘where might you be coming 
from, and where might you be going to? Were you coming 
to visit me? For, if so, you had gone past my gate without 
my seeing you.’ 

‘Well, no,’ answered Pippin. ‘To tell you the truth, since 
you have guessed it, we got into the lane from the other end: 
we had come over your fields. But that was quite by accident. 
We lost our way in the woods, back near Woodhall, trying to 
take a short cut to the Ferry.’ 

‘If you were in a hurry, the road would have served you 
better,’ said the farmer. ‘But I wasn’t worrying about that. 
You have leave to walk over my land, if you have a mind, 
Mr. Peregrin. And you, Mr. Baggins — though I daresay you 
still like mushrooms.’ He laughed. ‘Ah yes, I recognized the 
name. I recollect the time when young Frodo Baggins was 
one of the worst young rascals of Buckland. But it wasn’t 
mushrooms I was thinking of. I had just heard the name 
Baggins before you turned up. What do you think that funny 
customer asked me?’ 

They waited anxiously for him to go on. ‘Well,’ the farmer 
continued, approaching his point with slow relish, ‘he came 
riding on a big black horse in at the gate, which happened to 
be open, and right up to my door. All black he was himself, 
too, and cloaked and hooded up, as if he did not want to be 
known. ‘‘Now what in the Shire can he want?” I thought to 
myself. We don’t see many of the Big Folk over the border; 
and anyway I had never heard of any like this black fellow. 

“““Good-day to you!”’ I says, going out to him. ““This lane 
don’t lead anywhere, and wherever you may be going, your 
quickest way will be back to the road.” I didn’t like the looks 
of him; and when Grip came out, he took one sniff and let 


A SHORT CUT TO MUSHROOMS 123 


out a yelp as if he had been stung: he put down his tail and 
bolted off howling. The black fellow sat quite still. 

““T come from yonder,” he said, slow and _ stiff-like, 
pointing back west, over my fields, if you please. ““Have you 
seen Baggins?” he asked in a queer voice, and bent down 
towards me. I could not see any face, for his hood fell down 
so low; and I felt a sort of shiver down my back. But I did 
not see why he should come riding over my land so bold. 

‘“Be off!” I said. ““There are no Bagginses here. You’re in 
the wrong part of the Shire. You had better go back west to 
Hobbiton — but you can go by road this time.” 

““Baggins has left,’ he answered in a whisper. “He is 
coming. He is not far away. I wish to find him. If he passes 
will you tell me? I will come back with gold.”’ 

‘““No you won't,” I said. “You'll go back where you 
belong, double quick. I give you one minute before I call all 
my dogs.” 

‘He gave a sort of hiss. It might have been laughing, and 
it might not. Then he spurred his great horse right at me, 
and I jumped out of the way only just in time. I called the 
dogs, but he swung off, and rode through the gate and up 
the lane towards the causeway like a bolt of thunder. What 
do you think of that?’ 

Frodo sat for a moment looking at the fire, but his only 
thought was how on earth would they reach the Ferry. ‘I 
don’t know what to think,’ he said at last. 

“Then Ill tell you what to think,’ said Maggot. ‘You should 
never have gone mixing yourself up with Hobbiton folk, Mr. 
Frodo. Folk are queer up there.’ Sam stirred in his chair, and 
looked at the farmer with an unfriendly eye. ‘But you were 
always a reckless lad. When IJ heard you had left the Brandy- 
bucks and gone off to that old Mr. Bilbo, I said that you were 
going to find trouble. Mark my words, this all comes of those 
strange doings of Mr. Bilbo’s. His money was got in some 
strange fashion in foreign parts, they say. Maybe there is 
some that want to know what has become of the gold and 
jewels that he buried in the hill of Hobbiton, as I hear?’ 


I24 THE FELLOWSHIP OF THE RING 


Frodo said nothing: the shrewd guesses of the farmer were 
rather disconcerting. 

‘Well, Mr. Frodo,’ Maggot went on, ‘?m glad that you’ve 
had the sense to come back to Buckland. My advice is: stay 
there! And don’t get mixed up with these outlandish folk. 
You'll have friends in these parts. If any of these black fellows 
come after you again, I’ll deal with them. Ill say you’re dead, 
or have left the Shire, or anything you like. And that might 
be true enough; for as like as not it is old Mr. Bilbo they want 
news of.’ 

‘Maybe yourre right,’ said Frodo, avoiding the farmer’s eye 
and staring at the fire. 

Maggot looked at him thoughtfully. ‘Well, I see you have 
ideas of your own,’ he said. ‘It is as plain as my nose that no 
accident brought you and that rider here on the same after- 
noon; and maybe my news was no great news to you, after 
all. I am not asking you to tell me anything you have a mind 
to keep to yourself; but I see you are in some kind of trouble. 
Perhaps you are thinking it won’t be too easy to get to the 
Ferry without being caught?’ 

‘I was thinking so,’ said Frodo. ‘But we have got to try and 
get there; and it won’t be done by sitting and thinking. So I 
am afraid we must be going. Thank you very much indeed 
for your kindness! I’ve been in terror of you and your dogs 
for over thirty years, Farmer Maggot, though you may laugh 
to hear it. It’s a pity: for ?ve missed a good friend. And now 
I’m sorry to leave so soon. But I'll come back, perhaps, one 
day —if I get a chance.’ 

“Yow ll be welcome when you come,’ said Maggot. ‘But 
now I’ve a notion. It’s near sundown already, and we are 
going to have our supper; for we mostly go to bed soon after 
the Sun. If you and Mr. Peregrin and all could stay and have 
a bite with us, we would be pleased!’ 

‘And so should we!’ said Frodo. ‘But we must be going at 
once, I’m afraid. Even now it will be dark before we can 
reach the Ferry.’ 

‘Ah! but wait a minute! I was going to say: after a bit of 


A SHORT CUT TO MUSHROOMS 125 


supper, I'll get out a small waggon, and I’ll drive you all to 
the Ferry. That will save you a good step, and it might also 
save you trouble of another sort.’ 

Frodo now accepted the invitation gratefully, to the relief 
of Pippin and Sam. The sun was already behind the western 
hills, and the light was failing. Two of Maggot’s sons and his 
three daughters came in, and a generous supper was laid on 
the large table. The kitchen was lit with candles and the fire 
was mended. Mrs. Maggot bustled in and out. One or two 
other hobbits belonging to the farm-household came in. In a 
short while fourteen sat down to eat. There was beer in 
plenty, and a mighty dish of mushrooms and bacon, besides 
much other solid farmhouse fare. The dogs lay by the fire 
and gnawed rinds and cracked bones. 

When they had finished, the farmer and his sons went out 
with a lantern and got the waggon ready. It was dark in the 
yard, when the guests came out. They threw their packs on 
board and climbed in. The farmer sat in the driving-seat, and 
whipped up his two stout ponies. His wife stood in the light 
of the open door. 

‘You be careful of yourself, Maggot!’ she called. ‘Don’t go 
arguing with any foreigners, and come straight back!’ 

‘T will!’ said he, and drove out of the gate. There was now 
no breath of wind stirring; the night was still and quiet, and 
a chill was in the air. They went without lights and took it 
slowly. After a mile or two the lane came to an end, crossing 
a deep dike, and climbing a short slope up on to the high- 
banked causeway. 

Maggot got down and took a good look either way, north 
and south, but nothing could be seen in the darkness, and 
there was not a sound in the still air. Thin strands of river-mist 
were hanging above the dikes, and crawling over the fields. 

‘It’s going to be thick,’ said Maggot; ‘but Pll not light my 
lanterns till I turn for home. We’ll hear anything on the road 
long before we meet it tonight.’ 


K * ok 


126 THE FELLOWSHIP OF THE RING 


It was five miles or more from Maggot’s lane to the Ferry. 
The hobbits wrapped themselves up, but their ears were 
strained for any sound above the creak of the wheels and the 
slow clop of the ponies’ hoofs. The waggon seemed slower 
than a snail to Frodo. Beside him Pippin was nodding 
towards sleep; but Sam was staring forwards into the rising 
fog. 

They reached the entrance to the Ferry lane at last. It was 
marked by two tall white posts that suddenly loomed up on 
their right. Farmer Maggot drew in his ponies and the waggon 
creaked to a halt. They were just beginning to scramble out, 
when suddenly they heard what they had all been dreading: 
hoofs on the road ahead. The sound was coming towards 
them. 

Maggot jumped down and stood holding the ponies’ heads, 
and peering forward into the gloom. Clip-clop, clip-clop came 
the approaching rider. The fall of the hoofs sounded loud in 
the still, foggy air. 

“You'd better be hidden, Mr. Frodo,’ said Sam anxiously. 
“You get down in the waggon and cover up with blankets, 
and we’ll send this rider to the rightabouts!’ He climbed out 
and went to the farmer’s side. Black Riders would have to 
ride over him to get near the waggon. 

Clop-clop, clop-clop. ‘The rider was nearly on them. 

‘Hallo there!’ called Farmer Maggot. The advancing hoofs 
stopped short. They thought they could dimly guess a dark 
cloaked shape in the mist, a yard or two ahead. 

‘Now then!’ said the farmer, throwing the reins to Sam and 
striding forward. “Don’t you come a step nearer! What do 
you want, and where are you going?’ 

‘T want Mr. Baggins. Have you seen him?’ said a muffled 
voice — but the voice was the voice of Merry Brandybuck. A 
dark lantern was uncovered, and its light fell on the astonished 
face of the farmer. 

‘Mr. Merry!’ he cried. 

“Yes, of course! Who did you think it was?’ said Merry 
coming forward. As he came out of the mist and their fears 


A SHORT CUT TO MUSHROOMS I27 


subsided, he seemed suddenly to diminish to ordinary hobbit- 
size. He was riding a pony, and a scarf was swathed round 
his neck and over his chin to keep out the fog. 

Frodo sprang out of the waggon to greet him. ‘So there 
you are at last!’ said Merry. ‘I was beginning to wonder if 
you would turn up at all today, and I was just going back to 
supper. When it grew foggy I came across and rode up 
towards Stock to see if you had fallen in any ditches. But ’'m 
blest if I know which way you have come. Where did you 
find them, Mr. Maggot? In your duck-pond?’ 

‘No, I caught ’em trespassing,’ said the farmer, ‘and nearly 
set my dogs on ’em; but they’ll tell you all the story, I’ve no 
doubt. Now, if you’ll excuse me, Mr. Merry and Mr. Frodo 
and all, ’'d best be turning for home. Mrs. Maggot will be 
worriting with the night getting thick.’ 

He backed the waggon into the lane and turned it. ‘Well, 
good night to you all,’ he said. ‘It’s been a queer day, and no 
mistake. But all’s well as ends well; though perhaps we should 
not say that until we reach our own doors. [Il not deny that 
Tll be glad now when I do.’ He lit his lanterns, and got up. 
Suddenly he produced a large basket from under the seat. ‘I 
was nearly forgetting,’ he said. ‘Mrs. Maggot put this up for 
Mr. Baggins, with her compliments.’ He handed it down and 
moved off, followed by a chorus of thanks and good-nights. 

They watched the pale rings of light round his lanterns as 
they dwindled into the foggy night. Suddenly Frodo laughed: 
from the covered basket he held, the scent of mushrooms 
was rising. 


Chapter 5 


A CONSPIRACY UNMASKED 


‘Now we had better get home ourselves,’ said Merry. “There’s 
something funny about all this, I see; but it must wait till we 
get in.’ 

They turned down the Ferry lane, which was straight and 
well-kept and edged with large white-washed stones. In a 
hundred yards or so it brought them to the river-bank, where 
there was a broad wooden landing-stage. A large flat ferry- 
boat was moored beside it. The white bollards near the 
water’s edge glimmered in the light of two lamps on high 
posts. Behind them the mists in the flat fields were now above 
the hedges; but the water before them was dark, with only a 
few curling wisps like steam among the reeds by the bank. 
There seemed to be less fog on the further side. 

Merry led the pony over a gangway on to the ferry, and 
the others followed. Merry then pushed slowly off with a long 
pole. The Brandywine flowed slow and broad before them. 
On the other side the bank was steep, and up it a winding 
path climbed from the further landing. Lamps were twinkling 
there. Behind loomed up the Buck Hill; and out of it, through 
stray shrouds of mist, shone many round windows, yellow 
and red. They were the windows of Brandy Hall, the ancient 
home of the Brandybucks. 


Long ago Gorhendad Oldbuck, head of the Oldbuck 
family, one of the oldest in the Marish or indeed in the Shire, 
had crossed the river, which was the original boundary of 
the land eastwards. He built (and excavated) Brandy Hall, 
changed his name to Brandybuck, and settled down to 
become master of what was virtually a small independent 
country. His family grew and grew, and after his days con- 


A CONSPIRACY UNMASKED 129 


tinued to grow, until Brandy Hall occupied the whole of the 
low hill, and had three large front-doors, many side-doors, 
and about a hundred windows. The Brandybucks and their 
numerous dependants then began to burrow, and later to 
build, all round about. That was the origin of Buckland, a 
thickly inhabited strip between the river and the Old Forest, a 
sort of colony from the Shire. Its chief village was Bucklebury, 
clustering in the banks and slopes behind Brandy Hall. 

The people in the Marish were friendly with the Buck- 
landers, and the authority of the Master of the Hall (as the 
head of the Brandybuck family was called) was still acknowl- 
edged by the farmers between Stock and Rushey. But most 
of the folk of the old Shire regarded the Bucklanders as 
peculiar, half foreigners as it were. Though, as a matter of 
fact, they were not very different from the other hobbits 
of the Four Farthings. Except in one point: they were fond 
of boats, and some of them could swim. 

Their land was originally unprotected from the East; but 
on that side they had built a hedge: the High Hay. It had 
been planted many generations ago, and was now thick and 
tall, for it was constantly tended. It ran all the way from 
Brandywine Bridge, in a big loop curving away from the 
river, to Haysend (where the Withywindle flowed out of the 
Forest into the Brandywine): well over twenty miles from end 
to end. But, of course, it was not a complete protection. 
The Forest drew close to the hedge in many places. The 
Bucklanders kept their doors locked after dark, and that also 
was not usual in the Shire. 


The ferry-boat moved slowly across the water. The Buck- 
land shore drew nearer. Sam was the only member of the 
party who had not been over the river before. He had a 
strange feeling as the slow gurgling stream slipped by: his old 
life lay behind in the mists, dark adventure lay in front. He 
scratched his head, and for a moment had a passing wish that 
Mr. Frodo could have gone on living quietly at Bag End. 

The four hobbits stepped off the ferry. Merry was tying it 


130 THE FELLOWSHIP OF THE RING 


up, and Pippin was already leading the pony up the path, 
when Sam (who had been looking back, as if to take farewell 
of the Shire) said in a hoarse whisper: 

‘Look back, Mr. Frodo! Do you see anything?’ 

On the far stage, under the distant lamps, they could just 
make out a figure: it looked like a dark black bundle left 
behind. But as they looked it seemed to move and sway this 
way and that, as if searching the ground. It then crawled, or 
went crouching, back into the gloom beyond the lamps. 

‘What in the Shire is that?’ exclaimed Merry. 

‘Something that is following us,’ said Frodo. ‘But don’t ask 
any more now! Let’s get away at once!’ They hurried up the 
path to the top of the bank, but when they looked back the 
far shore was shrouded in mist, and nothing could be seen. 

“Thank goodness you don’t keep any boats on the west- 
bank!’ said Frodo. ‘Can horses cross the river?’ 

“They can go ten miles north to Brandywine Bridge — or 
they might swim,’ answered Merry. “Though I never heard 
of any horse swimming the Brandywine. But what have 
horses to do with it?’ 

‘Tl tell you later. Let’s get indoors and then we can talk.’ 

‘All right! You and Pippin know your way; so I’ll just ride 
on and tell Fatty Bolger that you are coming. We’ll see about 
supper and things.’ 

‘We had our supper early with Farmer Maggot,’ said 
Frodo; ‘but we could do with another.’ 

“You shall have it! Give me that basket!’ said Merry, and 
rode ahead into the darkness. 


It was some distance from the Brandywine to Frodo’s new 
house at Crickhollow. They passed Buck Hill and Brandy 
Hall on their left, and on the outskirts of Bucklebury struck 
the main road of Buckland that ran south from the Bridge. 
Half a mile northward along this they came to a lane opening 
on their right. This they followed for a couple of miles as it 
climbed up and down into the country. 

At last they came to a narrow gate in a thick hedge. Nothing 


A CONSPIRACY UNMASKED I31 


could be seen of the house in the dark: it stood back from 
the lane in the middle of a wide circle of lawn surrounded by 
a belt of low trees inside the outer hedge. Frodo had chosen 
it, because it stood in an out-of-the-way corner of the 
country, and there were no other dwellings close by. You 
could get in and out without being noticed. It had been built 
a long while before by the Brandybucks, for the use of guests, 
or members of the family that wished to escape from the 
crowded life of Brandy Hall for a time. It was an old- 
fashioned countrified house, as much like a hobbit-hole as 
possible: it was long and low, with no upper storey; and it 
had a roof of turf, round windows, and a large round door. 

As they walked up the green path from the gate no light 
was visible; the windows were dark and shuttered. Frodo 
knocked on the door, and Fatty Bolger opened it. A friendly 
light streamed out. They slipped in quickly and shut them- 
selves and the light inside. They were in a wide hall with 
doors on either side; in front of them a passage ran back 
down the middle of the house. 

‘Well, what do you think of it?’ asked Merry coming up 
the passage. ‘We have done our best in a short time to make 
it look like home. After all Fatty and I only got here with the 
last cart-load yesterday.’ 

Frodo looked round. It did look like home. Many of his 
own favourite things — or Bilbo’s things (they reminded him 
sharply of him in their new setting) — were arranged as nearly 
as possible as they had been at Bag End. It was a pleasant, 
comfortable, welcoming place; and he found himself wishing 
that he was really coming here to settle down in quiet retire- 
ment. It seemed unfair to have put his friends to all this 
trouble; and he wondered again how he was going to break 
the news to them that he must leave them so soon, indeed at 
once. Yet that would have to be done that very night, before 
they all went to bed. 

‘It’s delightful!’ he said with an effort. ‘I hardly feel that I 
have moved at all.’ 


132 THE FELLOWSHIP OF THE RING 


The travellers hung up their cloaks, and piled their packs on 
the floor. Merry led them down the passage and threw open a 
door at the far end. Firelight came out, and a puff of steam. 

‘A bath!’ cried Pippin. ‘O blessed Meriadoc!’ 

‘Which order shall we go in?’ said Frodo. ‘Eldest first, or 
quickest first? You'll be last either way, Master Peregrin.’ 

“Trust me to arrange things better than that!’ said Merry. 
‘We can’t begin life at Crickhollow with a quarrel over baths. 
In that room there are three tubs, and a copper full of boiling 
water. There are also towels, mats and soap. Get inside, and 
be quick!’ 

Merry and Fatty went into the kitchen on the other side of 
the passage, and busied themselves with the final preparations 
for a late supper. Snatches of competing songs came from 
the bathroom mixed with the sound of splashing and wallow- 
ing. The voice of Pippin was suddenly lifted up above the 
others in one of Bilbo’s favourite bath-songs. 


Sing hey! for the bath at close of day 
that washes the weary mud away! 
A loon ts he that will not sing: 

O! Water Hot ts a noble thing! 


O! Sweet is the sound of falling rain, 

and the brook that leaps from hill to plain; 
but better than rain or rippling streams 

1s Water Hot that smokes and steams. 


O! Water cold we may pour at need 
down a thirsty throat and be glad indeed; 
but better is Beer, if drink we lack, 

and Water Hot poured down the back. 


O! Water is fair that leaps on high 

in a fountain white beneath the sky; 
but never did fountain sound so sweet 
as splashing Hot Water with my feet! 


A CONSPIRACY UNMASKED 133 


There was a terrific splash, and a shout of Whoa! from 
Frodo. It appeared that a lot of Pippin’s bath had imitated a 
fountain and leaped on high. 

Merry went to the door: ‘What about supper and beer in 
the throat?’ he called. Frodo came out drying his hair. 

“There’s so much water in the air that I’m coming into the 
kitchen to finish,’ he said. 

‘Lawks!’ said Merry, looking in. The stone floor was swim- 
ming. ‘You ought to mop all that up before you get anything 
to eat, Peregrin,’ he said. ‘Hurry up, or we shan’t wait for you.’ 


They had supper in the kitchen on a table near the fire. 
‘I suppose you three won’t want mushrooms again?’ said 
Fredegar without much hope. 

“Yes we shall!’ cried Pippin. 

“They’re mine!’ said Frodo. ‘Given to me by Mrs. Maggot, 
a queen among farmers’ wives. Take your greedy hands 
away, and I’ll serve them.’ 

Hobbits have a passion for mushrooms, surpassing even 
the greediest likings of Big People. A fact which partly 
explains young Frodo’s long expeditions to the renowned 
fields of the Marish, and the wrath of the injured Maggot. 
On this occasion there was plenty for all, even according to 
hobbit standards. There were also many other things to fol- 
low, and when they had finished even Fatty Bolger heaved a 
sigh of content. They pushed back the table, and drew chairs 
round the fire. 

‘We'll clear up later,’ said Merry. ‘Now tell me all about it! 
I guess that you have been having adventures, which was not 
quite fair without me. I want a full account; and most of all 
I want to know what was the matter with old Maggot, and 
why he spoke to me like that. He sounded almost as if he was 
scared, if that is possible.’ 

‘We have all been scared,’ said Pippin after a pause, in 
which Frodo stared at the fire and did not speak. “You would 
have been, too, if you had been chased for two days by Black 
Riders.’ 


134 THE FELLOWSHIP OF THE RING 


‘And what are they?’ 

‘Black figures riding on black horses,’ answered Pippin. ‘If 
Frodo won't talk, I will tell you the whole tale from the 
beginning.’ He then gave a full account of their journey from 
the time when they left Hobbiton. Sam gave various support- 
ing nods and exclamations. Frodo remained silent. 

‘T should think you were making it all up,’ said Merry, ‘if 
I had not seen that black shape on the landing-stage — and 
heard the queer sound in Maggot’s voice. What do you make 
of it all, Frodo?’ 

‘Cousin Frodo has been very close,’ said Pippin. “But the 
time has come for him to open out. So far we have been 
given nothing more to go on than Farmer Maggot’s guess 
that it has something to do with old Bilbo’s treasure.’ 

“That was only a guess,’ said Frodo hastily. ‘Maggot does 
not know anything.’ 

‘Old Maggot is a shrewd fellow,’ said Merry. ‘A lot goes 
on behind his round face that does not come out in his talk. 
Ive heard that he used to go into the Old Forest at one time, 
and he has the reputation of knowing a good many strange 
things. But you can at least tell us, Frodo, whether you think 
his guess good or bad.’ 

‘T think, answered Frodo slowly, ‘that it was a good guess, 
as far as it goes. There zs a connexion with Bilbo’s old adven- 
tures, and the Riders are looking, or perhaps one ought to 
say searching, for him or for me. I also fear, if you want to 
know, that it is no joke at all; and that I am not safe here or 
anywhere else.’ He looked round at the windows and walls, 
as if he was afraid they would suddenly give way. The others 
looked at him in silence, and exchanged meaning glances 
among themselves. 

‘It’s coming out in a minute,’ whispered Pippin to Merry. 
Merry nodded. 

‘Well! said Frodo at last, sitting up and straightening his 
back, as if he had made a decision. ‘I can’t keep it dark any 
longer. I have got something to tell you all. But I don’t know 
quite how to begin.’ 


A CONSPIRACY UNMASKED 135 


‘T think I could help you,’ said Merry quietly, ‘by telling 
you some of it myself.’ 

‘What do you mean?’ said Frodo, looking at him anxiously. 

‘Just this, my dear old Frodo: you are miserable, because 
you don’t know how to say good-bye. You meant to leave the 
Shire, of course. But danger has come on you sooner than you 
expected, and now you are making up your mind to go at once. 
And you don’t want to. We are very sorry for you.’ 

Frodo opened his mouth and shut it again. His look of 
surprise was so comical that they laughed. ‘Dear old Frodo!’ 
said Pippin. ‘Did you really think you had thrown dust in all 
our eyes? You have not been nearly careful or clever enough 
for that! You have obviously been planning to go and saying 
farewell to all your haunts all this year since April. We have 
constantly heard you muttering: “Shall I ever look down 
into that valley again, I wonder’, and things like that. And 
pretending that you had come to the end of your money, and 
actually selling your beloved Bag End to those Sackville- 
Bagginses! And all those close talks with Gandalf.’ 

‘Good heavens!’ said Frodo. ‘I thought I had been both 
careful and clever. I don’t know what Gandalf would say. Is 
all the Shire discussing my departure then?’ 

‘Oh no!’ said Merry. ‘Don’t worry about that! The secret 
won’t keep for long, of course; but at present it is, I think, 
only known to us conspirators. After all, you must remember 
that we know you well, and are often with you. We can 
usually guess what you are thinking. I knew Bilbo, too. To 
tell you the truth, I have been watching you rather closely 
ever since he left. I thought you would go after him sooner 
or later; indeed I expected you to go sooner, and lately we 
have been very anxious. We have been terrified that you 
might give us the slip, and go off suddenly, all on your own 
like he did. Ever since this spring we have kept our eyes open, 
and done a good deal of planning on our own account. You 
are not going to escape so easily!’ 

‘But I must go,’ said Frodo. ‘It cannot be helped, dear 
friends. It is wretched for us all, but it is no use your trying 


136 THE FELLOWSHIP OF THE RING 


to keep me. Since you have guessed so much, please help me 
and do not hinder me!’ 

“You do not understand!’ said Pippin. “You must go — and 
therefore we must, too. Merry and I are coming with you. 
Sam is an excellent fellow, and would jump down a dragon’s 
throat to save you, if he did not trip over his own feet; but 
you will need more than one companion in your dangerous 
adventure.’ 

‘My dear and most beloved hobbits!’ said Frodo deeply 
moved. ‘But I could not allow it. I decided that long ago, too. 
You speak of danger, but you do not understand. This is no 
treasure-hunt, no there-and-back journey. I am flying from 
deadly peril into deadly peril.’ 

‘Of course we understand,’ said Merry firmly. “That is 
why we have decided to come. We know the Ring is no 
laughing-matter; but we are going to do our best to help you 
against the Enemy.’ 

“The Ring!’ said Frodo, now completely amazed. 

“Yes, the Ring,’ said Merry. ‘My dear old hobbit, you don’t 
allow for the inquisitiveness of friends. I have known about 
the existence of the Ring for years — before Bilbo went away, 
in fact; but since he obviously regarded it as secret, I kept the 
knowledge in my head, until we formed our conspiracy. I did 
not know Bilbo, of course, as well as I know you; I was too 
young, and he was also more careful — but he was not care- 
ful enough. If you want to know how I first found out, I will 
tell you.’ 

‘Go on!’ said Frodo faintly. 

‘It was the Sackville-Bagginses that were his downfall, as you 
might expect. One day, a year before the Party, I happened to 
be walking along the road, when I saw Bilbo ahead. Suddenly 
in the distance the S.-B.s appeared, coming towards us. Bilbo 
slowed down, and then hey presto! he vanished. I was so 
startled that I hardly had the wits to hide myself in a more 
ordinary fashion; but I got through the hedge and walked 
along the field inside. I was peeping through into the road, 
after the S.-B.s had passed, and was looking straight at Bilbo 


A CONSPIRACY UNMASKED 137 


when he suddenly reappeared. I caught a glint of gold as he 
put something back in his trouser-pocket. 

‘After that I kept my eyes open. In fact, I confess that I 
spied. But you must admit that it was very intriguing, and 
I was only in my teens. I must be the only one in the Shire, 
besides you Frodo, that has ever seen the old fellow’s secret 
book.’ 

“You have read his book!’ cried Frodo. “Good heavens 
above! Is nothing safe?’ 

‘Not too safe, I should say,’ said Merry. ‘But I have only 
had one rapid glance, and that was difficult to get. He never 
left the book about. I wonder what became of it. I should like 
another look. Have you got it, Frodo?’ 

‘No. It was not at Bag End. He must have taken it away.’ 

‘Well, as I was saying,’ Merry proceeded, ‘I kept my know- 
ledge to myself, till this spring when things got serious. ‘Then 
we formed our conspiracy; and as we were serious, too, and 
meant business, we have not been too scrupulous. You are 
not a very easy nut to crack, and Gandalf is worse. But if you 
want to be introduced to our chief investigator, I can produce 
him.’ 

‘Where is he?’ said Frodo, looking round, as if he expected 
a masked and sinister figure to come out of a cupboard. 

‘Step forward, Sam!’ said Merry; and Sam stood up with 
a face scarlet up to the ears. ‘Here’s our collector of infor- 
mation! And he collected a lot, I can tell you, before he was 
finally caught. After which, I may say, he seemed to regard 
himself as on parole, and dried up.’ 

‘Sam!’ cried Frodo, feeling that amazement could go no 
further, and quite unable to decide whether he felt angry, 
amused, relieved, or merely foolish. 

‘Yes, sir!’ said Sam. ‘Begging your pardon, sir! But I meant 
no wrong to you, Mr. Frodo, nor to Mr. Gandalf for that 
matter. He has some sense, mind you; and when you said go 
alone, he said no! take someone as you can trust.’ 

‘But it does not seem that I can trust anyone,’ said Frodo. 

Sam looked at him unhappily. ‘It all depends on what you 


138 THE FELLOWSHIP OF THE RING 


want,’ put in Merry. “You can trust us to stick to you through 
thick and thin — to the bitter end. And you can trust us to 
keep any secret of yours — closer than you keep it yourself. 
But you cannot trust us to let you face trouble alone, and go 
off without a word. We are your friends, Frodo. Anyway: 
there it is. We know most of what Gandalf has told you. We 
know a good deal about the Ring. We are horribly afraid — 
but we are coming with you; or following you like hounds.’ 

‘And after all, sir,’ added Sam, ‘you did ought to take the 
Elves’ advice. Gildor said you should take them as was will- 
ing, and you can’t deny it.’ 

‘I don’t deny it,’ said Frodo, looking at Sam, who was now 
grinning. ‘I don’t deny it, but I'll never believe you are sleep- 
ing again, whether you snore or not. I shall kick you hard to 
make sure. 

‘You are a set of deceitful scoundrels!’ he said, turning to 
the others. ‘But bless you!’ he laughed, getting up and waving 
his arms, ‘I give in. I will take Gildor’s advice. If the danger 
were not so dark, I should dance for joy. Even so, I cannot 
help feeling happy; happier than I have felt for a long time. 
I had dreaded this evening.’ 

‘Good! That’s settled. Three cheers for Captain Frodo and 
company!’ they shouted; and they danced round him. Merry 
and Pippin began a song, which they had apparently got 
ready for the occasion. 

It was made on the model of the dwarf-song that started 
Bilbo on his adventure long ago, and went to the same tune: 


Farewell we call to hearth and hall! 
Though wind may blow and rain may fall, 
We must away ere break of day 

Far over wood and mountain tall. 


To Rivendell, where Elves yet dwell 

In glades beneath the misty fell, 

Through moor and waste we ride in haste, 
And whither then we cannot tell. 


A CONSPIRACY UNMASKED 139 


With foes ahead, behind us dread, 
Beneath the sky shall be our bed, 
Until at last our toil be passed, 
Our journey done, our errand sped. 


We must away! We must away! 
We ride before the break of day! 


‘Very good!’ said Frodo. “But in that case there are a lot of 
things to do before we go to bed — under a roof, for tonight 
at any rate.’ 

‘Oh! That was poetry!’ said Pippin. “Do you really mean 
to start before the break of day?’ 

‘I don’t know,’ answered Frodo. ‘I fear those Black Riders, 
and I am sure it is unsafe to stay in one place long, especially 
in a place to which it is known I was going. Also Gildor 
advised me not to wait. But I should very much like to see 
Gandalf. I could see that even Gildor was disturbed when he 
heard that Gandalf had never appeared. It really depends on 
two things. How soon could the Riders get to Bucklebury? 
And how soon could we get off? It will take a good deal of 
preparation.’ 

“The answer to the second question,’ said Merry, ‘is that 
we could get off in an hour. I have prepared practically every- 
thing. There are five ponies in a stable across the fields; stores 
and tackle are all packed, except for a few extra clothes, and 
the perishable food.’ 

‘It seems to have been a very efficient conspiracy,’ said 
Frodo. ‘But what about the Black Riders? Would it be safe 
to wait one day for Gandalf?’ 

“That all depends on what you think the Riders would do, 
if they found you here,’ answered Merry. “They could have 
reached here by now, of course, if they were not stopped at 
the North-gate, where the Hedge runs down to the river- 
bank, just this side of the Bridge. The gate-guards would not 
let them through by night, though they might break through. 
Even in the daylight they would try to keep them out, I think, 


I40 THE FELLOWSHIP OF THE RING 


at any rate until they got a message through to the Master of 
the Hall — for they would not like the look of the Riders, 
and would certainly be frightened by them. But, of course, 
Buckland cannot resist a determined attack for long. And it 
is possible that in the morning even a Black Rider that rode 
up and asked for Mr. Baggins would be let through. It is 
pretty generally known that you are coming back to live at 
Crickhollow.’ 


Frodo sat for a while in thought. ‘I have made up my 
mind,’ he said finally. ‘I am starting tomorrow, as soon as it 
is light. But I am not going by road: it would be safer to wait 
here than that. If I go through the North-gate my departure 
from Buckland will be known at once, instead of being secret 
for several days at least, as it might be. And what is more, 
the Bridge and the East Road near the borders will certainly 
be watched, whether any Rider gets into Buckland or not. 
We don’t know how many there are; but there are at least 
two, and possibly more. The only thing to do is to go off in 
a quite unexpected direction.’ 

‘But that can only mean going into the Old Forest!’ said 
Fredegar horrified. “You can’t be thinking of doing that. It is 
quite as dangerous as Black Riders.’ 

‘Not quite,’ said Merry. ‘It sounds very desperate, but I 
believe Frodo is right. It is the only way of getting off without 
being followed at once. With luck we might get a considerable 
start.’ 

‘But you won’t have any luck in the Old Forest,’ objected 
Fredegar. ‘No one ever has luck in there. You’ll get lost. 
People don’t go in there.’ 

‘Oh yes they do!’ said Merry. “The Brandybucks go in — 
occasionally when the fit takes them. We have a private 
entrance. Frodo went in once, long ago. I have been in several 
times: usually in daylight, of course, when the trees are sleepy 
and fairly quiet.’ 

‘Well, do as you think best!’ said Fredegar. ‘I am more 
afraid of the Old Forest than of anything I know about: the 


A CONSPIRACY UNMASKED I4I 


stories about it are a nightmare; but my vote hardly counts, 
as Iam not going on the journey. Still, lam very glad someone 
is stopping behind, who can tell Gandalf what you have done, 
when he turns up, as I am sure he will before long.’ 

Fond as he was of Frodo, Fatty Bolger had no desire to 
leave the Shire, nor to see what lay outside it. His family 
came from the Eastfarthing, from Budgeford in Bridgefields 
in fact, but he had never been over the Brandywine Bridge. 
His task, according to the original plans of the conspirators, 
was to stay behind and deal with inquisitive folk, and to keep 
up as long as possible the pretence that Mr. Baggins was still 
living at Crickhollow. He had even brought along some old 
clothes of Frodo’s to help him in playing the part. They little 
thought how dangerous that part might prove. 

‘Excellent!’ said Frodo, when he understood the plan. “We 
could not have left any message behind for Gandalf other- 
wise. I don’t know whether these Riders can read or not, of 
course, but I should not have dared to risk a written message, 
in case they got in and searched the house. But if Fatty is 
willing to hold the fort, and I can be sure of Gandalf knowing 
the way we have gone, that decides me. I am going into the 
Old Forest first thing tomorrow.’ 

‘Well, that’s that,’ said Pippin. ‘On the whole I would rather 
have our job than Fatty’s — waiting here till Black Riders 
come.’ 

“You wait till you are well inside the Forest,’ said Fredegar. 
‘You'll wish you were back here with me before this time 
tomorrow.’ 

‘It’s no good arguing about it any more,’ said Merry. ‘We 
have still got to tidy up and put the finishing touches to the 
packing, before we get to bed. I shall call you all before the 
break of day.’ 


When at last he had got to bed, Frodo could not sleep for 
some time. His legs ached. He was glad that he was riding in 
the morning. Eventually he fell into a vague dream, in which 
he seemed to be looking out of a high window over a dark 


142 THE FELLOWSHIP OF THE RING 


sea of tangled trees. Down below among the roots there was 
the sound of creatures crawling and snuffling. He felt sure 
they would smell him out sooner or later. 

Then he heard a noise in the distance. At first he thought 
it was a great wind coming over the leaves of the forest. Then 
he knew that it was not leaves, but the sound of the Sea 
far-off; a sound he had never heard in waking life, though it 
had often troubled his dreams. Suddenly he found he was 
out in the open. There were no trees after all. He was on a 
dark heath, and there was a strange salt smell in the air. 
Looking up he saw before him a tall white tower, standing 
alone on a high ridge. A great desire came over him to climb 
the tower and see the Sea. He started to struggle up the ridge 
towards the tower: but suddenly a light came in the sky, and 
there was a noise of thunder. 


Chapter 6 


THE OLD FOREST 


Frodo woke suddenly. It was still dark in the room. Merry 
was standing there with a candle in one hand, and banging 
on the door with the other. ‘All right! What is it?’ said Frodo, 
still shaken and bewildered. 

‘What is it!’ cried Merry. ‘It is time to get up. It is half past 
four and very foggy. Come on! Sam is already getting breakfast 
ready. Even Pippin is up. I am just going to saddle the ponies, 
and fetch the one that is to be the baggage-carrier. Wake that 
sluggard Fatty! At least he must get up and see us off.’ 

Soon after six o’clock the five hobbits were ready to start. 
Fatty Bolger was still yawning. They stole quietly out of the 
house. Merry went in front leading a laden pony, and took 
his way along a path that went through a spinney behind the 
house, and then cut across several fields. The leaves of trees 
were glistening, and every twig was dripping; the grass was 
grey with cold dew. Everything was still, and far-away noises 
seemed near and clear: fowls chattering in a yard, someone 
closing a door of a distant house. 

In their shed they found the ponies: sturdy little beasts of 
the kind loved by hobbits, not speedy, but good for a long 
day’s work. They mounted, and soon they were riding off 
into the mist, which seemed to open reluctantly before them 
and close forbiddingly behind them. After riding for about 
an hour, slowly and without talking, they saw the Hedge 
looming suddenly ahead. It was tall and netted over with 
silver cobwebs. 

‘How are you going to get through this?’ asked Fredegar. 

‘Follow me!’ said Merry, ‘and you will see.’ He turned to 
the left along the Hedge, and soon they came to a point where 
it bent inwards, running along the lip of a hollow. A cutting 


144 THE FELLOWSHIP OF THE RING 


had been made, at some distance from the Hedge, and went 
sloping gently down into the ground. It had walls of brick at 
the sides, which rose steadily, until suddenly they arched over 
and formed a tunnel that dived deep under the Hedge and 
came out in the hollow on the other side. 

Here Fatty Bolger halted. “Good-bye, Frodo!’ he said. ‘I 
wish you were not going into the Forest. I only hope you will 
not need rescuing before the day is out. But good luck to you 
— today and every day!’ 

‘If there are no worse things ahead than the Old Forest, I 
shall be lucky,’ said Frodo. “Tell Gandalf to hurry along the 
East Road: we shall soon be back on it and going as fast as 
we can.’ ‘Good-bye!’ they cried, and rode down the slope 
and disappeared from Fredegar’s sight into the tunnel. 

It was dark and damp. At the far end it was closed by a 
gate of thick-set iron bars. Merry got down and unlocked the 
gate, and when they had all passed through he pushed it to 
again. It shut with a clang, and the lock clicked. The sound 
was ominous. 

“There!’ said Merry. ‘You have left the Shire, and are now 
outside, and on the edge of the Old Forest.’ 

‘Are the stories about it true?’ asked Pippin. 

‘IT don’t know what stories you mean,’ Merry answered. ‘If 
you mean the old bogey-stories Fatty’s nurses used to tell 
him, about goblins and wolves and things of that sort, I 
should say no. At any rate I don’t believe them. But the 
Forest 7s queer. Everything in it is very much more alive, 
more aware of what is going on, so to speak, than things are 
in the Shire. And the trees do not like strangers. They watch 
you. They are usually content merely to watch you, as long 
as daylight lasts, and don’t do much. Occasionally the most 
unfriendly ones may drop a branch, or stick a root out, or 
grasp at you with a long trailer. But at night things can be 
most alarming, or so I am told. I have only once or twice 
been in here after dark, and then only near the hedge. I 
thought all the trees were whispering to each other, passing 
news and plots along in an unintelligible language; and the 


THE OLD FOREST 145 


branches swayed and groped without any wind. They do say 
the trees do actually move, and can surround strangers and 
hem them in. In fact long ago they attacked the Hedge: they 
came and planted themselves right by it, and leaned over it. 
But the hobbits came and cut down hundreds of trees, and 
made a great bonfire in the Forest, and burned all the ground 
in a long strip east of the Hedge. After that the trees gave up 
the attack, but they became very unfriendly. There is still a 
wide bare space not far inside where the bonfire was made.’ 
‘Is it only the trees that are dangerous?’ asked Pippin. 
“There are various queer things living deep in the Forest, 
and on the far side,’ said Merry, ‘or at least I have heard so; 
but I have never seen any of them. But something makes 
paths. Whenever one comes inside one finds open tracks; but 
they seem to shift and change from time to time in a queer 
fashion. Not far from this tunnel there is, or was for a long 
time, the beginning of quite a broad path leading to the 
Bonfire Glade, and then on more or less in our direction, east 
and a little north. That is the path I am going to try and find.’ 


The hobbits now left the tunnel-gate and rode across the 
wide hollow. On the far side was a faint path leading up on 
to the floor of the Forest, a hundred yards and more beyond 
the Hedge; but it vanished as soon as it brought them under 
the trees. Looking back they could see the dark line of the 
Hedge through the stems of trees that were already thick 
about them. Looking ahead they could see only tree-trunks 
of innumerable sizes and shapes: straight or bent, twisted, 
leaning, squat or slender, smooth or gnarled and branched; 
and all the stems were green or grey with moss and slimy, 
shaggy growths. 

Merry alone seemed fairly cheerful. “You had better lead 
on and find that path,’ Frodo said to him. ‘Don’t let us lose 
one another, or forget which way the Hedge lies!’ 

They picked a way among the trees, and their ponies 
plodded along, carefully avoiding the many writhing and 
interlacing roots. There was no undergrowth. The ground 


146 THE FELLOWSHIP OF THE RING 


was rising steadily, and as they went forward it seemed that 
the trees became taller, darker, and thicker. There was no 
sound, except an occasional drip of moisture falling through 
the still leaves. For the moment there was no whispering or 
movement among the branches; but they all got an uncom- 
fortable feeling that they were being watched with dis- 
approval, deepening to dislike and even enmity. The feeling 
steadily grew, until they found themselves looking up quickly, 
or glancing back over their shoulders, as if they expected a 
sudden blow. 

There was not as yet any sign of a path, and the trees 
seemed constantly to bar their way. Pippin suddenly felt that 
he could not bear it any longer, and without warning let out 
a shout. ‘Oi! Oi! he cried. ‘I am not going to do anything. 
Just let me pass through, will you!’ 

The others halted startled; but the cry fell as if muffled by 
a heavy curtain. There was no echo or answer though the 
wood seemed to become more crowded and more watchful 
than before. 

‘I should not shout, if I were you,’ said Merry. ‘It does 
more harm than good.’ 

Frodo began to wonder if it were possible to find a way 
through, and if he had been right to make the others come 
into this abominable wood. Merry was looking from side to 
side, and seemed already uncertain which way to go. Pippin 
noticed it. ‘It has not taken you long to lose us,’ he said. But at 
that moment Merry gave a whistle of relief and pointed ahead. 

‘Well, well!’ he said. “These trees do shift. There is the 
Bonfire Glade in front of us (or I hope so), but the path to it 
seems to have moved away!’ 


The light grew clearer as they went forward. Suddenly they 
came out of the trees and found themselves in a wide circular 
space. There was sky above them, blue and clear to their 
surprise, for down under the Forest-roof they had not been 
able to see the rising morning and the lifting of the mist. The 
sun was not, however, high enough yet to shine down into 


THE OLD FOREST 147 


the clearing, though its light was on the tree-tops. The leaves 
were all thicker and greener about the edges of the glade, 
enclosing it with an almost solid wall. No tree grew there, 
only rough grass and many tall plants: stalky and faded hem- 
locks and wood-parsley, fire-weed seeding into fluffy ashes, 
and rampant nettles and thistles. A dreary place: but it 
seemed a charming and cheerful garden after the close Forest. 

The hobbits felt encouraged, and looked up hopefully at 
the broadening daylight in the sky. At the far side of the glade 
there was a break in the wall of trees, and a clear path beyond 
it. They could see it running on into the wood, wide in places 
and open above, though every now and again the trees drew 
in and overshadowed it with their dark boughs. Up this path 
they rode. They were still climbing gently, but they now went 
much quicker, and with better heart; for it seemed to them 
that the Forest had relented, and was going to let them pass 
unhindered after all. 

But after a while the air began to get hot and stuffy. The 
trees drew close again on either side, and they could no longer 
see far ahead. Now stronger than ever they felt again the 
ill will of the wood pressing on them. So silent was it that 
the fall of their ponies’ hoofs, rustling on dead leaves and 
occasionally stumbling on hidden roots, seemed to thud in 
their ears. Frodo tried to sing a song to encourage them, but 
his voice sank to a murmur. 


O! Wanderers in the shadowed land 
despair not! For though dark they stand, 
all woods there be must end at last, 

and see the open sun go past: 

the setting sun, the rising sun, 

the day’s end, or the day begun. 

For east or west all woods must fail... 


Fail — even as he said the word his voice faded into silence. 
The air seemed heavy and the making of words wearisome. 
Just behind them a large branch fell from an old overhanging 


148 THE FELLOWSHIP OF THE RING 


tree with a crash into the path. The trees seemed to close in 
before them. 

“They do not like all that about ending and failing,’ said 
Merry. ‘I should not sing any more at present. Wait till we do 
get to the edge, and then we’ll turn and give them a rousing 
chorus!’ 

He spoke cheerfully, and if he felt any great anxiety, he did 
not show it. The others did not answer. They were depressed. 
A heavy weight was settling steadily on Frodo’s heart, and 
he regretted now with every step forward that he had ever 
thought of challenging the menace of the trees. He was, 
indeed, just about to stop and propose going back (Cf that 
was still possible), when things took a new turn. The path 
stopped climbing, and became for a while nearly level. The 
dark trees drew aside, and ahead they could see the path going 
almost straight forward. Before them, but some distance off, 
there stood a green hill-top, treeless, rising like a bald head 
out of the encircling wood. The path seemed to be making 
directly for it. 


They now hurried forward again, delighted with the 
thought of climbing out for a while above the roof of the 
Forest. The path dipped, and then again began to climb 
upwards, leading them at last to the foot of the steep hillside. 
There it left the trees and faded into the turf. The wood stood 
all round the hill like thick hair that ended sharply in a circle 
round a shaven crown. 

The hobbits led their ponies up, winding round and round 
until they reached the top. There they stood and gazed about 
them. The air was gleaming and sunlit, but hazy; and they 
could not see to any great distance. Near at hand the mist 
was now almost gone; though here and there it lay in hollows 
of the wood, and to the south of them, out of a deep fold 
cutting right across the Forest, the fog still rose like steam or 
wisps of white smoke. 

“That,” said Merry, pointing with his hand, ‘that is the line 
of the Withywindle. It comes down out of the Downs and 


THE OLD FOREST 149 


flows south-west through the midst of the Forest to join the 
Brandywine below Haysend. We don’t want to go that way! 
The Withywindle valley is said to be the queerest part of the 
whole wood — the centre from which all the queerness comes, 
as it were.’ 

The others looked in the direction that Merry pointed out, 
but they could see little but mists over the damp and deep-cut 
valley; and beyond it the southern half of the Forest faded 
from view. 

The sun on the hill-top was now getting hot. It must have 
been about eleven o’clock; but the autumn haze still pre- 
vented them from seeing much in other directions. In the 
west they could not make out either the line of the Hedge or 
the valley of the Brandywine beyond it. Northward, where 
they looked most hopefully, they could see nothing that might 
be the line of the great East Road, for which they were 
making. They were on an island in a sea of trees, and the 
horizon was veiled. 

On the south-eastern side the ground fell very steeply, as 
if the slopes of the hill were continued far down under the 
trees, like island-shores that really are the sides of a mountain 
rising out of deep waters. They sat on the green edge and 
looked out over the woods below them, while they ate their 
mid-day meal. As the sun rose and passed noon they 
glimpsed far off in the east the grey-green lines of the Downs 
that lay beyond the Old Forest on that side. That cheered 
them greatly; for it was good to see a sight of anything beyond 
the wood’s borders, though they did not mean to go that way, 
if they could help it: the Barrow-downs had as sinister a 
reputation in hobbit-legend as the Forest itself. 


At length they made up their minds to go on again. The path 
that had brought them to the hill reappeared on the north- 
ward side; but they had not followed it far before they became 
aware that it was bending steadily to the right. Soon it began 
to descend rapidly and they guessed that it must actually 
be heading towards the Withywindle valley: not at all the 


I50 THE FELLOWSHIP OF THE RING 


direction they wished to take. After some discussion they 
decided to leave this misleading path and strike northward; 
for although they had not been able to see it from the hill-top, 
the Road must lie that way, and it could not be many miles 
off. Also northward, and to the left of the path, the land 
seemed to be drier and more open, climbing up to slopes 
where the trees were thinner, and pines and firs replaced the 
oaks and ashes and other strange and nameless trees of the 
denser wood. 

At first their choice seemed to be good: they got along at 
a fair speed, though whenever they got a glimpse of the sun 
in an open glade they seemed unaccountably to have veered 
eastwards. But after a time the trees began to close in again, 
just where they had appeared from a distance to be thinner 
and less tangled. Then deep folds in the ground were dis- 
covered unexpectedly, like the ruts of great giant-wheels or 
wide moats and sunken roads long disused and choked with 
brambles. These lay usually right across their line of march, 
and could only be crossed by scrambling down and out again, 
which was troublesome and difficult with their ponies. Each 
time they climbed down they found the hollow filled with thick 
bushes and matted undergrowth, which somehow would not 
yield to the left, but only gave way when they turned to the 
right; and they had to go some distance along the bottom 
before they could find a way up the further bank. Each time 
they clambered out, the trees seemed deeper and darker; and 
always to the left and upwards it was most difficult to find a 
way, and they were forced to the right and downwards. 


After an hour or two they had lost all clear sense of direc- 
tion, though they knew well enough that they had long ceased 
to go northward at all. They were being headed off, and were 
simply following a course chosen for them — eastwards and 
southwards, into the heart of the Forest and not out of it. 

The afternoon was wearing away when they scrambled and 
stumbled into a fold that was wider and deeper than any they 
had yet met. It was so steep and overhung that it proved 


THE OLD FOREST E51 


impossible to climb out of it again, either forwards or back- 
wards, without leaving their ponies and their baggage behind. 
All they could do was to follow the fold - downwards. The 
ground grew soft, and in places boggy; springs appeared in 
the banks, and soon they found themselves following a brook 
that trickled and babbled through a weedy bed. Then the 
ground began to fall rapidly, and the brook growing strong 
and noisy, flowed and leaped swiftly downhill. They were in 
a deep dim-lit gully over-arched by trees high above them. 

After stumbling along for some way along the stream, they 
came quite suddenly out of the gloom. As if through a gate 
they saw the sunlight before them. Coming to the opening 
they found that they had made their way down through a 
cleft in a high steep bank, almost a cliff. At its feet was a 
wide space of grass and reeds; and in the distance could be 
glimpsed another bank almost as steep. A golden afternoon 
of late sunshine lay warm and drowsy upon the hidden land 
between. In the midst of it there wound lazily a dark river of 
brown water, bordered with ancient willows, arched over 
with willows, blocked with fallen willows, and flecked with 
thousands of faded willow-leaves. The air was thick with 
them, fluttering yellow from the branches; for there was a 
warm and gentle breeze blowing softly in the valley, and the 
reeds were rustling, and the willow-boughs were creaking. 

‘Well, now I have at least some notion of where we are!’ 
said Merry. ‘We have come almost in the opposite direction 
to which we intended. This is the River Withywindle! I will 
go on and explore.’ 

He passed out into the sunshine and disappeared into the 
long grasses. After a while he reappeared, and reported that 
there was fairly solid ground between the cliff-foot and the 
river; in some places firm turf went down to the water’s edge. 
‘What’s more,’ he said, ‘there seems to be something like a 
footpath winding along on this side of the river. If we turn 
left and follow it, we shall be bound to come out on the east 
side of the Forest eventually.’ 

‘I dare say!’ said Pippin. “That is, if the track goes on so 


152 THE FELLOWSHIP OF THE RING 


far, and does not simply lead us into a bog and leave us there. 
Who made the track, do you suppose, and why? I am sure it 
was not for our benefit. I am getting very suspicious of this 
Forest and everything in it, and I begin to believe all the 
stories about it. And have you any idea how far eastward we 
should have to go?’ 

‘No,’ said Merry, ‘I haven’t. I don’t know in the least how 
far down the Withywindle we are, or who could possibly 
come here often enough to make a path along it. But there is 
no other way out that I can see or think of.’ 

There being nothing else for it, they filed out, and Merry 
led them to the path that he had discovered. Everywhere the 
reeds and grasses were lush and tall, in places far above their 
heads; but once found, the path was easy to follow, as it 
turned and twisted, picking out the sounder ground among 
the bogs and pools. Here and there it passed over other rills, 
running down gullies into the Withywindle out of the higher 
forest-lands, and at these points there were tree-trunks or 
bundles of brushwood laid carefully across. 


The hobbits began to feel very hot. There were armies of 
flies of all kinds buzzing round their ears, and the afternoon 
sun was burning on their backs. At last they came suddenly 
into a thin shade; great grey branches reached across the 
path. Each step forward became more reluctant than the last. 
Sleepiness seemed to be creeping out of the ground and up 
their legs, and falling softly out of the air upon their heads 
and eyes. 

Frodo felt his chin go down and his head nod. Just in front 
of him Pippin fell forward on to his knees. Frodo halted. ‘It’s 
no good,’ he heard Merry saying. ‘Can’t go another step with- 
out rest. Must have nap. It’s cool under the willows. Less flies!’ 

Frodo did not like the sound of this. ‘Come on!’ he cried. 
‘We can’t have a nap yet. We must get clear of the Forest 
first.” But the others were too far gone to care. Beside them 
Sam stood yawning and blinking stupidly. 

Suddenly Frodo himself felt sleep overwhelming him. His 


THE OLD FOREST 153 


head swam. There now seemed hardly a sound in the air. 
The flies had stopped buzzing. Only a gentle noise on the 
edge of hearing, a soft fluttering as of a song half whispered, 
seemed to stir in the boughs above. He lifted his heavy eyes 
and saw leaning over him a huge willow-tree, old and hoary. 
Enormous it looked, its sprawling branches going up like 
reaching arms with many long-fingered hands, its knotted 
and twisted trunk gaping in wide fissures that creaked faintly 
as the boughs moved. The leaves fluttering against the bright 
sky dazzled him, and he toppled over, lying where he fell 
upon the grass. 

Merry and Pippin dragged themselves forward and lay 
down with their backs to the willow-trunk. Behind them the 
great cracks gaped wide to receive them as the tree swayed 
and creaked. They looked up at the grey and yellow leaves, 
moving softly against the light, and singing. They shut their 
eyes, and then it seemed that they could almost hear words, 
cool words, saying something about water and sleep. They 
gave themselves up to the spell and fell fast asleep at the foot 
of the great grey willow. 

Frodo lay for a while fighting with the sleep that was over- 
powering him; then with an effort he struggled to his feet 
again. He felt a compelling desire for cool water. ‘Wait for 
me, Sam,’ he stammered. ‘Must bathe feet a minute.’ 

Half in a dream he wandered forward to the riverward side 
of the tree, where great winding roots grew out into the 
stream, like gnarled dragonets straining down to drink. He 
straddled one of these, and paddled his hot feet in the cool 
brown water; and there he too suddenly fell asleep with his 
back against the tree. 


Sam sat down and scratched his head, and yawned like a 
cavern. He was worried. The afternoon was getting late, and 
he thought this sudden sleepiness uncanny. “There’s more 
behind this than sun and warm air,’ he muttered to himself. 
‘I don’t like this great big tree. I don’t trust it. Hark at it 
singing about sleep now! This won’t do at all!’ 


154 THE FELLOWSHIP OF THE RING 


He pulled himself to his feet, and staggered off to see what 
had become of the ponies. He found that two had wandered 
on a good way along the path; and he had just caught them 
and brought them back towards the others, when he heard 
two noises; one loud, and the other soft but very clear. One 
was the splash of something heavy falling into the water; the 
other was a noise like the snick of a lock when a door quietly 
closes fast. 

He rushed back to the bank. Frodo was in the water close 
to the edge, and a great tree-root seemed to be over him and 
holding him down, but he was not struggling. Sam gripped 
him by the jacket, and dragged him from under the root; and 
then with difficulty hauled him on to the bank. Almost at 
once he woke, and coughed and spluttered. 

‘Do you know, Sam,’ he said at length, ‘the beastly tree 
threw me in! I felt it. The big root just twisted round and 
tipped me in!’ 

“You were dreaming I expect, Mr. Frodo,’ said Sam. ‘You 
shouldn’t sit in such a place, if you feel sleepy.’ 

‘What about the others?’ Frodo asked. ‘I wonder what sort 
of dreams they are having.’ 

They went round to the other side of the tree, and then 
Sam understood the click that he had heard. Pippin had 
vanished. The crack by which he had laid himself had closed 
together, so that not a chink could be seen. Merry was 
trapped: another crack had closed about his waist; his legs 
lay outside, but the rest of him was inside a dark opening, 
the edges of which gripped like a pair of pincers. 

Frodo and Sam beat first upon the tree-trunk where Pippin 
had lain. They then struggled frantically to pull open the jaws 
of the crack that held poor Merry. It was quite useless. 

‘What a foul thing to happen!’ cried Frodo wildly. “Why did 
we ever come into this dreadful Forest? I wish we were all back 
at Crickhollow!’ He kicked the tree with all his strength, heed- 
less of his own feet. A hardly perceptible shiver ran through 
the stem and up into the branches; the leaves rustled and 
whispered, but with a sound now of faint and far-off laughter. 


THE OLD FOREST 155 


‘I suppose we haven’t got an axe among our luggage, Mr. 
Frodo?’ asked Sam. 

‘IT brought a little hatchet for chopping firewood,’ said 
Frodo. “That wouldn’t be much use.’ 

‘Wait a minute!’ cried Sam, struck by an idea suggested by 
firewood. ‘We might do something with fire!’ 

‘We might,’ said Frodo doubtfully. ‘We might succeed in 
roasting Pippin alive inside.’ 

‘We might try to hurt or frighten this tree to begin with,’ 
said Sam fiercely. ‘If it don’t let them go, I'll have it down, if 
I have to gnaw it.’ He ran to the ponies and before long came 
back with two tinder-boxes and a hatchet. 

Quickly they gathered dry grass and leaves, and bits of 
bark; and made a pile of broken twigs and chopped sticks. 
These they heaped against the trunk on the far side of the 
tree from the prisoners. As soon as Sam had struck a spark 
into the tinder, it kindled the dry grass and a flurry of flame 
and smoke went up. The twigs crackled. Little fingers of fire 
licked against the dry scored rind of the ancient tree and 
scorched it. A tremor ran through the whole willow. The 
leaves seemed to hiss above their heads with a sound of pain 
and anger. A loud scream came from Merry, and from far 
inside the tree they heard Pippin give a muffled yell. 

‘Put it out! Put it out! cried Merry. “He’ll squeeze me in 
two, if you don’t. He says so!’ 

‘Who? What?’ shouted Frodo, rushing round to the other 
side of the tree. 

‘Put it out! Put it out!’ begged Merry. The branches of the 
willow began to sway violently. There was a sound as of a 
wind rising and spreading outwards to the branches of all the 
other trees round about, as though they had dropped a stone 
into the quiet slumber of the river-valley and set up ripples 
of anger that ran out over the whole Forest. Sam kicked at 
the little fire and stamped out the sparks. But Frodo, without 
any clear idea of why he did so, or what he hoped for, ran 
along the path crying help! help! help! It seemed to him that 
he could hardly hear the sound of his own shrill voice: it was 


156 THE FELLOWSHIP OF THE RING 


blown away from him by the willow-wind and drowned in a 
clamour of leaves, as soon as the words left his mouth. He 
felt desperate: lost and witless. 

Suddenly he stopped. There was an answer, or so he 
thought; but it seemed to come from behind him, away down 
the path further back in the Forest. He turned round and 
listened, and soon there could be no doubt: someone was 
singing a song; a deep glad voice was singing carelessly and 
happily, but it was singing nonsense: 


Hey dol! merry dol! ring a dong dillo! 
Ring a dong! hop along! fal lal the willow! 
Tom Bom, jolly Tom, Tom Bombadillo! 


Half hopeful and half afraid of some new danger, Frodo 
and Sam now both stood still. Suddenly out of a long string 
of nonsense-words (or so they seemed) the voice rose up 
loud and clear and burst into this song: 


Hey! Come merry dol! derry dol! My darling! 

Light goes the weather-wind and the feathered starling. 
Down along under Hill, shining in the sunlight, 
Waiting on the doorstep for the cold starlight, 

There my pretty lady is, River-woman’s daughter, 
Slender as the willow-wand, clearer than the water. 
Old Tom Bombadil water-lhes bringing 

Comes hopping home again. Can you hear him singing? 
Hey! Come merry dol! derry dol! and merry-o, 
Goldberry, Goldberry, merry yellow berry-o! 

Poor old Willow-man, you tuck your roots away! 
Tom’s in a hurry now. Evening will follow day. 

Tom’s going home again water-lhes bringing. 

Hey! Come derry dol! Can you hear me singing? 


Frodo and Sam stood as if enchanted. The wind puffed 
out. The leaves hung silently again on stiff branches. There 
was another burst of song, and then suddenly, hopping and 


THE OLD FOREST 157 


dancing along the path, there appeared above the reeds an 
old battered hat with a tall crown and a long blue feather 
stuck in the band. With another hop and a bound there came 
into view a man, or so it seemed. At any rate he was too large 
and heavy for a hobbit, if not quite tall enough for one of the 
Big People, though he made noise enough for one, stumping 
along with great yellow boots on his thick legs, and charging 
through grass and rushes like a cow going down to drink. He 
had a blue coat and a long brown beard; his eyes were blue 
and bright, and his face was red as a ripe apple, but creased 
into a hundred wrinkles of laughter. In his hands he carried 
on a large leaf as on a tray a small pile of white water-lilies. 

‘Help!’ cried Frodo and Sam running towards him with 
their hands stretched out. 

‘Whoa! Whoa! steady there!’ cried the old man, holding up 
one hand, and they stopped short, as if they had been struck 
stiff. ‘Now, my little fellows, where be you a-going to, puffing 
like a bellows? What’s the matter here then? Do you know 
who I am? ’m Tom Bombadil. Tell me what’s your trouble! 
Tom’s in a hurry now. Don’t you crush my lilies!’ 

‘My friends are caught in the willow-tree,’ cried Frodo 
breathlessly. 

‘Master Merry’s being squeezed in a crack!’ cried Sam. 

‘What?’ shouted Tom Bombadil, leaping up in the air. ‘Old 
Man Willow? Naught worse than that, eh? That can soon be 
mended. I know the tune for him. Old grey Willow-man! [ll 
freeze his marrow cold, if he don’t behave himself. Pll sing 
his roots off. Pll sing a wind up and blow leaf and branch 
away. Old Man Willow!’ 

Setting down his lilies carefully on the grass, he ran to the 
tree. There he saw Merry’s feet still sticking out — the rest 
had already been drawn further inside. Tom put his mouth 
to the crack and began singing into it in a low voice. They 
could not catch the words, but evidently Merry was aroused. 
His legs began to kick. Tom sprang away, and breaking off 
a hanging branch smote the side of the willow with it. “You 
let them out again, Old Man Willow!’ he said. “What be you 


158 THE FELLOWSHIP OF THE RING 


a-thinking of? You should not be waking. Eat earth! Dig 
deep! Drink water! Go to sleep! Bombadil is talking!’ He 
then seized Merry’s feet and drew him out of the suddenly 
widening crack. 

There was a tearing creak and the other crack split open, 
and out of it Pippin sprang, as if he had been kicked. Then 
with a loud snap both cracks closed fast again. A shudder ran 
through the tree from root to tip, and complete silence fell. 

“Thank you!’ said the hobbits, one after the other. 

Tom Bombadil burst out laughing. ‘Well, my little fellows!’ 
said he, stooping so that he peered into their faces. “You shall 
come home with me! The table is all laden with yellow cream, 
honeycomb, and white bread and butter. Goldberry is wait- 
ing. Time enough for questions around the supper table. You 
follow after me as quick as you are able!’ With that he picked 
up his lilies, and then with a beckoning wave of his hand 
went hopping and dancing along the path eastward, still 
singing loudly and nonsensically. 

Too surprised and too relieved to talk, the hobbits followed 
after him as fast as they could. But that was not fast enough. 
Tom soon disappeared in front of them, and the noise of his 
singing got fainter and further away. Suddenly his voice came 
floating back to them in a loud halloo! 


Hop along, my little friends, up the Withywindle! 
Tom’s going on ahead candles for to kindle. 

Down west sinks the Sun: soon you will be groping. 
When the night-shadows fall, then the door will open, 
Out of the window-panes light will twinkle yellow. 
Fear no alder black! Heed no hoary willow! 

Fear neither root nor bough! Tom goes on before you. 
Hey now! merry dol! We'll be waiting for you! 


After that the hobbits heard no more. Almost at once the 
sun seemed to sink into the trees behind them. They thought 
of the slanting light of evening glittering on the Brandywine 
River, and the windows of Bucklebury beginning to gleam 


THE OLD FOREST 159 


with hundreds of lights. Great shadows fell across them; 
trunks and branches of trees hung dark and threatening over 
the path. White mists began to rise and curl on the surface 
of the river and stray about the roots of the trees upon its 
borders. Out of the very ground at their feet a shadowy steam 
arose and mingled with the swiftly falling dusk. 

It became difficult to follow the path, and they were very 
tired. Their legs seemed leaden. Strange furtive noises ran 
among the bushes and reeds on either side of them; and if 
they looked up to the pale sky, they caught sight of queer 
gnarled and knobbly faces that gloomed dark against the 
twilight, and leered down at them from the high bank and 
the edges of the wood. They began to feel that all this country 
was unreal, and that they were stumbling through an ominous 
dream that led to no awakening. 

Just as they felt their feet slowing down to a standstill, they 
noticed that the ground was gently rising. The water began 
to murmur. In the darkness they caught the white glimmer 
of foam, where the river flowed over a short fall. Then sud- 
denly the trees came to an end and the mists were left behind. 
They stepped out from the Forest, and found a wide sweep 
of grass welling up before them. The river, now small and 
swift, was leaping merrily down to meet them, glinting here 
and there in the light of the stars, which were already shining 
in the sky. 

The grass under their feet was smooth and short, as if it 
had been mown or shaven. The eaves of the Forest behind 
were clipped, and trim as a hedge. The path was now plain 
before them, well-tended and bordered with stone. It wound 
up on to the top of a grassy knoll, now grey under the pale 
starry night; and there, still high above them on a further 
slope, they saw the twinkling lights of a house. Down again 
the path went, and then up again, up a long smooth hillside 
of turf, towards the light. Suddenly a wide yellow beam 
flowed out brightly from a door that was opened. There was 
Tom Bombadil’s house before them, up, down, under hill. 
Behind it a steep shoulder of the land lay grey and bare, and 


160 THE FELLOWSHIP OF THE RING 


beyond that the dark shapes of the Barrow-downs stalked 
away into the eastern night. 

They all hurried forward, hobbits and ponies. Already half 
their weariness and all their fears had fallen from them. Hey! 
Come merry dol! rolled out the song to greet them. 


Hey! Come derry dol! Hop along, my hearties! 
Hobbits! Ponies all! We are fond of parties. 
Now let the fun begin! Let us sing together! 


Then another clear voice, as young and as ancient as 
Spring, like the song of a glad water flowing down into the 
night from a bright morning in the hills, came falling like 
silver to meet them: 


Now let the song begin! Let us sing together 

Of sun, stars, moon and mist, rain and cloudy weather, 
Light on the budding leaf, dew on the feather, 

Wind on the open hill, bells on the heather, 

Reeds by the shady pool, lilies on the water: 

Old Tom Bombadil and the River-daughter! 


And with that song the hobbits stood upon the threshold, 
and a golden light was all about them. 


Chapter 7 


IN THE HOUSE OF TOM BOMBADIL 


The four hobbits stepped over the wide stone threshold, and 
stood still, blinking. They were in a long low room, filled with 
the light of lamps swinging from the beams of the roof; and 
on the table of dark polished wood stood many candles, tall 
and yellow, burning brightly. 

In a chair, at the far side of the room facing the outer 
door, sat a woman. Her long yellow hair rippled down her 
shoulders; her gown was green, green as young reeds, shot 
with silver like beads of dew; and her belt was of gold, shaped 
like a chain of flag-lilies set with the pale-blue eyes of forget- 
me-nots. About her feet in wide vessels of green and brown 
earthenware, white water-lilies were floating, so that she 
seemed to be enthroned in the midst of a pool. 

‘Enter, good guests!’ she said, and as she spoke they knew 
that it was her clear voice they had heard singing. They came 
a few timid steps further into the room, and began to bow 
low, feeling strangely surprised and awkward, like folk that, 
knocking at a cottage door to beg for a drink of water, have 
been answered by a fair young elf-queen clad in living 
flowers. But before they could say anything, she sprang lightly 
up and over the lily-bowls, and ran laughing towards them; 
and as she ran her gown rustled softly like the wind in the 
flowering borders of a river. 

‘Come dear folk!’ she said, taking Frodo by the hand. ‘Laugh 
and be merry! I am Goldberry, daughter of the River.’ Then 
lightly she passed them and closing the door she turned her 
back to it, with her white arms spread out across it. ‘Let us shut 
out the night!’ she said. ‘For you are still afraid, perhaps, of mist 
and tree-shadows and deep water, and untame things. Fear 
nothing! For tonight you are under the roof of Tom Bombadil.’ 


162 THE FELLOWSHIP OF THE RING 


The hobbits looked at her in wonder; and she looked at 
each of them and smiled. ‘Fair lady Goldberry!’ said Frodo 
at last, feeling his heart moved with a joy that he did not 
understand. He stood as he had at times stood enchanted by 
fair elven-voices; but the spell that was now laid upon him 
was different: less keen and lofty was the delight, but deeper 
and nearer to mortal heart; marvellous and yet not strange. 
‘Fair lady Goldberry!’ he said again. ‘Now the joy that was 
hidden in the songs we heard is made plain to me. 


O slender as a willow-wand! O clearer than clear water! 
O reed by the living pool! Fair River-daughter! 

O spring-time and summer-time, and spring again after! 
O wind on the waterfall, and the leaves’ laughter!’ 


Suddenly he stopped and stammered, overcome with sur- 
prise to hear himself saying such things. But Goldberry 
laughed. 

‘Welcome!’ she said. ‘I had not heard that folk of the Shire 
were so sweet-tongued. But I see that you are an Elf-friend; 
the light in your eyes and the ring in your voice tells it. This 
is a merry meeting! Sit now, and wait for the Master of 
the house! He will not be long. He is tending your tired 
beasts.’ 

The hobbits sat down gladly in low rush-seated chairs, 
while Goldberry busied herself about the table; and their eyes 
followed her, for the slender grace of her movement filled 
them with quiet delight. From somewhere behind the house 
came the sound of singing. Every now and again they caught, 
among many a derry dol and a merry dol and a ring a ding 
dillo the repeated words: 


Old Tom Bombadil ts a merry fellow; 
Bright blue his jacket is, and his boots are yellow. 


‘Fair lady!’ said Frodo again after a while. “Tell me, if my 
asking does not seem foolish, who is ‘Tom Bombadil?’ 


IN THE HOUSE OF TOM BOMBADIL 163 


‘He is,’ said Goldberry, staying her swift movements and 
smiling. 

Frodo looked at her questioningly. “He is, as you have seen 
him,’ she said in answer to his look. ‘He is the Master of 
wood, water, and hill.’ 

“Then all this strange land belongs to him?’ 

‘No indeed!’ she answered, and her smile faded. “That 
would indeed be a burden,’ she added in a low voice, as if to 
herself. “The trees and the grasses and all things growing or 
living in the land belong each to themselves. Tom Bombadil 
is the Master. No one has ever caught old Tom walking in 
the forest, wading in the water, leaping on the hill-tops under 
light and shadow. He has no fear. ‘'om Bombadil is master.’ 

A door opened and in came Tom Bombadil. He had now 
no hat and his thick brown hair was crowned with autumn 
leaves. He laughed, and going to Goldberry, took her hand. 

‘Here’s my pretty lady!’ he said, bowing to the hobbits. 
‘Here’s my Goldberry clothed all in silver-green with flowers 
in her girdle! Is the table laden? I see yellow cream and 
honeycomb, and white bread, and butter; milk, cheese, and 
green herbs and ripe berries gathered. Is that enough for us? 
Is the supper ready?’ 

‘It is,’ said Goldberry; ‘but the guests perhaps are not?’ 

Tom clapped his hands and cried: “Tom, Tom! your guests 
are tired, and you had near forgotten! Come now, my merry 
friends, and Tom will refresh you! You shall clean grimy 
hands, and wash your weary faces; cast off your muddy 
cloaks and comb out your tangles!’ 

He opened the door, and they followed him down a short 
passage and round a sharp turn. They came to a low room 
with a sloping roof (a penthouse, it seemed, built on to the 
north end of the house). Its walls were of clean stone, but 
they were mostly covered with green hanging mats and yellow 
curtains. The floor was flagged, and strewn with fresh green 
rushes. There were four deep mattresses, each piled with 
white blankets, laid on the floor along one side. Against the 
opposite wall was a long bench laden with wide earthenware 


164 THE FELLOWSHIP OF THE RING 


basins, and beside it stood brown ewers filled with water, 
some cold, some steaming hot. There were soft green slippers 
set ready beside each bed. 


Before long, washed and refreshed, the hobbits were seated 
at the table, two on each side, while at either end sat Gold- 
berry and the Master. It was a long and merry meal. Though 
the hobbits ate, as only famished hobbits can eat, there was 
no lack. The drink in their drinking-bowls seemed to be clear 
cold water, yet it went to their hearts like wine and set free 
their voices. The guests became suddenly aware that they 
were singing merrily, as if it was easier and more natural than 
talking. 

At last Tom and Goldberry rose and cleared the table 
swiftly. The guests were commanded to sit quiet, and were 
set in chairs, each with a footstool to his tired feet. There was 
a fire in the wide hearth before them, and it was burning 
with a sweet smell, as if it were built of apple-wood. When 
everything was set in order, all the lights in the room were 
put out, except one lamp and a pair of candles at each end 
of the chimney-shelf. Then Goldberry came and stood before 
them, holding a candle; and she wished them each a good 
night and deep sleep. 

‘Have peace now,’ she said, ‘until the morning! Heed no 
nightly noises! For nothing passes door and window here 
save moonlight and starlight and the wind off the hill-top. 
Good night!’ She passed out of the room with a glimmer and 
a rustle. The sound of her footsteps was like a stream falling 
gently away downhill over cool stones in the quiet of night. 

Tom sat on a while beside them in silence, while each of 
them tried to muster the courage to ask one of the many 
questions he had meant to ask at supper. Sleep gathered on 
their eyelids. At last Frodo spoke: 

‘Did you hear me calling, Master, or was it just chance that 
brought you at that moment?’ 

Tom stirred like a man shaken out of a pleasant dream. 
‘Eh, what?’ said he. “Did I hear you calling? Nay, I did not 


IN THE HOUSE OF TOM BOMBADIL 165 


hear: I was busy singing. Just chance brought me then, if 
chance you call it. It was no plan of mine, though I was 
waiting for you. We heard news of you, and learned that you 
were wandering. We guessed you’d come ere long down to 
the water: all paths lead that way, down to Withywindle. Old 
grey Willow-man, he’s a mighty singer; and it’s hard for little 
folk to escape his cunning mazes. But ‘Tom had an errand 
there, that he dared not hinder.’ Tom nodded as if sleep was 
taking him again; but he went on in a soft singing voice: 


I had an errand there: gathering water-lilies, 

green leaves and lilies white to please my pretty lady, 

the last ere the year’s end to keep them from the winter, 
to flower by her pretty feet till the snows are melted. 
Each year at summer’s end I go to find them for her, 

in a wide pool, deep and clear, far down Withywindle; 
there they open first in spring and there they linger latest. 
By that pool long ago I found the River-daughter, 

Jair young Goldberry sitting in the rushes. 

Sweet was her singing then, and her heart was beating! 


He opened his eyes and looked at them with a sudden glint 
of blue: 


And that proved well for you — for now I shall no longer 
go down deep again along the forest-water, 

not while the year ts old. Nor shall I be passing 

Old Man Willow’s house this side of spring-time, 

not till the merry spring, when the River-daughter 
dances down the withy-path to bathe in the water. 


He fell silent again; but Frodo could not help asking one 
more question: the one he most desired to have answered. 
“Tell us, Master,’ he said, ‘about the Willow-man. What is 
he? I have never heard of him before.’ 

‘No, don’t! said Merry and Pippin together, sitting sud- 
denly upright. “Not now! Not until the morning!’ 


166 THE FELLOWSHIP OF THE RING 


“That is right!’ said the old man. ‘Now is the time for 
resting. Some things are ill to hear when the world’s in 
shadow. Sleep till the morning-light, rest on the pillow! Heed 
no nightly noise! Fear no grey willow!’ And with that he took 
down the lamp and blew it out, and grasping a candle in 
either hand he led them out of the room. 

Their mattresses and pillows were soft as down, and the 
blankets were of white wool. They had hardly laid themselves 
on the deep beds and drawn the light covers over them before 
they were asleep. 


In the dead night, Frodo lay in a dream without light. Then 
he saw the young moon rising; under its thin light there 
loomed before him a black wall of rock, pierced by a dark 
arch like a great gate. It seemed to Frodo that he was lifted 
up, and passing over he saw that the rock-wall was a circle 
of hills, and that within it was a plain, and in the midst of the 
plain stood a pinnacle of stone, like a vast tower but not made 
by hands. On its top stood the figure of a man. The moon as 
it rose seemed to hang for a moment above his head and 
glistened in his white hair as the wind stirred it. Up from the 
dark plain below came the crying of fell voices, and the howl- 
ing of many wolves. Suddenly a shadow, like the shape of 
great wings, passed across the moon. The figure lifted his 
arms and a light flashed from the staff that he wielded. A 
mighty eagle swept down and bore him away. The voices 
wailed and the wolves yammered. There was a noise like a 
strong wind blowing, and on it was borne the sound of hoofs, 
galloping, galloping, galloping from the East. ‘Black Riders!’ 
thought Frodo as he wakened, with the sound of the hoofs 
still echoing in his mind. He wondered if he would ever again 
have the courage to leave the safety of these stone walls. He 
lay motionless, still listening; but all was now silent, and at 
last he turned and fell asleep again or wandered into some 
other unremembered dream. 

At his side Pippin lay dreaming pleasantly; but a change 
came over his dreams and he turned and groaned. Suddenly 


IN THE HOUSE OF TOM BOMBADIL 167 


he woke, or thought he had waked, and yet still heard in the 
darkness the sound that had disturbed his dream: tcp-tap, 
squeak: the noise was like branches fretting in the wind, 
twig-fingers scraping wall and window: creak, creak, creak. 
He wondered if there were willow-trees close to the house; 
and then suddenly he had a dreadful feeling that he was not 
in an ordinary house at all, but inside the willow and listening 
to that horrible dry creaking voice laughing at him again. He 
sat up, and felt the soft pillows yield to his hands, and he lay 
down again relieved. He seemed to hear the echo of words 
in his ears: ‘Fear nothing! Have peace until the morning! 
Heed no nightly noises!’ Then he went to sleep again. 

It was the sound of water that Merry heard falling into his 
quiet sleep: water streaming down gently, and then spreading, 
spreading irresistibly all round the house into a dark shoreless 
pool. It gurgled under the walls, and was rising slowly but 
surely. ‘I shall be drowned!’ he thought. ‘It will find its way 
in, and then I shall drown.’ He felt that he was lying in a soft 
slimy bog, and springing up he set his foot on the corner of 
a cold hard flagstone. Then he remembered where he was 
and lay down again. He seemed to hear or remember hearing: 
‘Nothing passes doors or windows save moonlight and star- 
light and the wind off the hill-top.’ A little breath of sweet air 
moved the curtain. He breathed deep and fell asleep again. 

As far as he could remember, Sam slept through the night 
in deep content, if logs are contented. 


They woke up, all four at once, in the morning light. Tom 
was moving about the room whistling like a starling. When 
he heard them stir he clapped his hands, and cried: ‘Hey! 
Come merry dol! derry dol! My hearties!’ He drew back the 
yellow curtains, and the hobbits saw that these had covered 
the windows, at either end of the room, one looking east and 
the other looking west. 

They leapt up refreshed. Frodo ran to the eastern window, 
and found himself looking into a kitchen-garden grey with 
dew. He had half expected to see turf right up to the walls, 


168 THE FELLOWSHIP OF THE RING 


turf all pocked with hoof-prints. Actually his view was 
screened by a tall line of beans on poles; but above and far 
beyond them the grey top of the hill loomed up against the 
sunrise. It was a pale morning: in the East, behind long clouds 
like lines of soiled wool stained red at the edges, lay glimmer- 
ing deeps of yellow. The sky spoke of rain to come; but the 
light was broadening quickly, and the red flowers on the 
beans began to glow against the wet green leaves. 

Pippin looked out of the western window, down into a pool 
of mist. The Forest was hidden under a fog. It was like 
looking down on to a sloping cloud-roof from above. There 
was a fold or channel where the mist was broken into many 
plumes and billows: the valley of the Withywindle. The 
stream ran down the hill on the left and vanished into the 
white shadows. Near at hand was a flower-garden and a 
clipped hedge silver-netted, and beyond that grey shaven 
grass pale with dew-drops. There was no willow-tree to be 
seen. 

‘Good morning, merry friends!’ cried Tom, opening the 
eastern window wide. A cool air flowed in; it had a rainy 
smell. ‘Sun won’t show her face much today, I’m thinking. I 
have been walking wide, leaping on the hill-tops, since the 
grey dawn began, nosing wind and weather, wet grass under- 
foot, wet sky above me. I wakened Goldberry singing 
under window; but naught wakes hobbit-folk in the early 
morning. In the night little folk wake up in the darkness, and 
sleep after light has come! Ring a ding dillo! Wake now, my 
merry friends! Forget the nightly noises! Ring a ding dillo 
del! derry del, my hearties! If you come soon you'll find 
breakfast on the table. If you come late you’ll get grass and 
rain-water!’ 

Needless to say — not that Tom’s threat sounded very 
serious — the hobbits came soon, and left the table late and 
only when it was beginning to look rather empty. Neither 
Tom nor Goldberry were there. Tom could be heard about 
the house, clattering in the kitchen, and up and down the 
stairs, and singing here and there outside. The room looked 


IN THE HOUSE OF TOM BOMBADIL 169 


westward over the mist-clouded valley, and the window was 
open. Water dripped down from the thatched eaves above. 
Before they had finished breakfast the clouds had joined into 
an unbroken roof, and a straight grey rain came softly and 
steadily down. Behind its deep curtain the Forest was com- 
pletely veiled. 

As they looked out of the window there came falling gently 
as if it was flowing down the rain out of the sky, the clear 
voice of Goldberry singing up above them. They could hear 
few words, but it seemed plain to them that the song was a 
rain-song, as sweet as showers on dry hills, that told the tale 
of a river from the spring in the highlands to the Sea far 
below. The hobbits listened with delight; and Frodo was glad 
in his heart, and blessed the kindly weather, because it 
delayed them from departing. The thought of going had been 
heavy upon him from the moment he awoke; but he guessed 
now that they would not go further that day. 


The upper wind settled in the West and deeper and wetter 
clouds rolled up to spill their laden rain on the bare heads of 
the Downs. Nothing could be seen all round the house but 
falling water. Frodo stood near the open door and watched 
the white chalky path turn into a little river of milk and go 
bubbling away down into the valley. Tom Bombadil came 
trotting round the corner of the house, waving his arms as if 
he was warding off the rain — and indeed when he sprang 
over the threshold he seemed quite dry, except for his boots. 
These he took off and put in the chimney-corner. Then he 
sat in the largest chair and called the hobbits to gather round 
him. 

“This is Goldberry’s washing day,’ he said, ‘and her 
autumn-cleaning. ‘Too wet for hobbit-folk — let them rest 
while they are able! It’s a good day for long tales, for questions 
and for answers, so Tom will start the talking.’ 

He then told them many remarkable stories, sometimes 
half as if speaking to himself, sometimes looking at them 
suddenly with a bright blue eye under his deep brows. Often 


I70 THE FELLOWSHIP OF THE RING 


his voice would turn to song, and he would get out of his 
chair and dance about. He told them tales of bees and flowers, 
the ways of trees, and the strange creatures of the Forest, 
about the evil things and good things, things friendly and 
things unfriendly, cruel things and kind things, and secrets 
hidden under brambles. 

As they listened, they began to understand the lives of the 
Forest, apart from themselves, indeed to feel themselves as 
the strangers where all other things were at home. Moving 
constantly in and out of his talk was Old Man Willow, and 
Frodo learned now enough to content him, indeed more than 
enough, for it was not comfortable lore. ‘Tom’s words laid 
bare the hearts of trees and their thoughts, which were often 
dark and strange, and filled with a hatred of things that go free 
upon the earth, gnawing, biting, breaking, hacking, burning: 
destroyers and usurpers. It was not called the Old Forest 
without reason, for it was indeed ancient, a survivor of vast 
forgotten woods; and in it there lived yet, ageing no quicker 
than the hills, the fathers of the fathers of trees, remembering 
times when they were lords. The countless years had filled 
them with pride and rooted wisdom, and with malice. But 
none were more dangerous than the Great Willow: his heart 
was rotten, but his strength was green; and he was cunning, 
and a master of winds, and his song and thought ran through 
the woods on both sides of the river. His grey thirsty spirit 
drew power out of the earth and spread like fine root-threads 
in the ground, and invisible twig-fingers in the air, till it had 
under its dominion nearly all the trees of the Forest from the 
Hedge to the Downs. 

Suddenly Tom’s talk left the woods and went leaping up 
the young stream, over bubbling waterfalls, over pebbles and 
worn rocks, and among small flowers in close grass and wet 
crannies, wandering at last up on to the Downs. They heard 
of the Great Barrows, and the green mounds, and the stone- 
rings upon the hills and in the hollows among the hills. Sheep 
were bleating in flocks. Green walls and white walls rose. 
There were fortresses on the heights. Kings of little kingdoms 


IN THE HOUSE OF TOM BOMBADIL I71I 


fought together, and the young Sun shone like fire on the red 
metal of their new and greedy swords. There was victory and 
defeat; and towers fell, fortresses were burned, and flames 
went up into the sky. Gold was piled on the biers of dead 
kings and queens; and mounds covered them, and the stone 
doors were shut; and the grass grew over all. Sheep walked 
for a while biting the grass, but soon the hills were empty 
again. A shadow came out of dark places far away, and the 
bones were stirred in the mounds. Barrow-wights walked in 
the hollow places with a clink of rings on cold fingers, and 
gold chains in the wind. Stone rings grinned out of the ground 
like broken teeth in the moonlight. 

The hobbits shuddered. Even in the Shire the rumour of 
the Barrow-wights of the Barrow-downs beyond the Forest 
had been heard. But it was not a tale that any hobbit liked to 
listen to, even by a comfortable fireside far away. These four 
now suddenly remembered what the joy of this house had 
driven from their minds: the house of Tom Bombadil nestled 
under the very shoulder of those dreaded hills. They lost the 
thread of his tale and shifted uneasily, looking aside at one 
another. 

When they caught his words again they found that he had 
now wandered into strange regions beyond their memory and 
beyond their waking thought, into times when the world was 
wider, and the seas flowed straight to the western Shore; and 
still on and back Tom went singing out into ancient starlight, 
when only the Elf-sires were awake. Then suddenly he 
stopped, and they saw that he nodded as if he was falling 
asleep. The hobbits sat still before him, enchanted; and it 
seemed as if, under the spell of his words, the wind had 
gone, and the clouds had dried up, and the day had been 
withdrawn, and darkness had come from East and West, and 
all the sky was filled with the light of white stars. 

Whether the morning and evening of one day or of many 
days had passed Frodo could not tell. He did not feel either 
hungry or tired, only filled with wonder. The stars shone 
through the window and the silence of the heavens seemed 


172 THE FELLOWSHIP OF THE RING 


to be round him. He spoke at last out of his wonder and a 
sudden fear of that silence: 

‘Who are you, Master?’ he asked. 

‘Eh, what?’ said Tom sitting up, and his eyes glinting in 
the gloom. ‘Don’t you know my name yet? That’s the only 
answer. Tell me, who are you, alone, yourself and nameless? 
But you are young and I am old. Eldest, that’s what I am. 
Mark my words, my friends: Tom was here before the river 
and the trees; ‘tom remembers the first raindrop and the first 
acorn. He made paths before the Big People, and saw the 
little People arriving. He was here before the Kings and the 
graves and the Barrow-wights. When the Elves passed west- 
ward, Tom was here already, before the seas were bent. He 
knew the dark under the stars when it was fearless — before 
the Dark Lord came from Outside.’ 

A shadow seemed to pass by the window, and the hobbits 
glanced hastily through the panes. When they turned again, 
Goldberry stood in the door behind, framed in light. She held 
a candle, shielding its flame from the draught with her hand; 
and the light flowed through it, like sunlight through a white 
shell. 

“The rain has ended,’ she said; ‘and new waters are running 
downhill, under the stars. Let us now laugh and be glad!’ 

‘And let us have food and drink!’ cried Tom. ‘Long tales 
are thirsty. And long listening’s hungry work, morning, noon, 
and evening!’ With that he jumped out of his chair, and with 
a bound took a candle from the chimney-shelf and lit it in 
the flame that Goldberry held; then he danced about the 
table. Suddenly he hopped through the door and dis- 
appeared. 

Quickly he returned, bearing a large and laden tray. Then 
Tom and Goldberry set the table; and the hobbits sat half in 
wonder and half in laughter: so fair was the grace of Gold- 
berry and so merry and odd the caperings of Tom. Yet in 
some fashion they seemed to weave a single dance, neither 
hindering the other, in and out of the room, and round about 
the table; and with great speed food and vessels and lights 


IN THE HOUSE OF TOM BOMBADIL 173 


were set in order. The boards blazed with candles, white and 
yellow. Tom bowed to his guests. ‘Supper is ready,’ said 
Goldberry; and now the hobbits saw that she was clothed all 
in silver with a white girdle, and her shoes were like fishes’ 
mail. But Tom was all in clean blue, blue as rain-washed 
forget-me-nots, and he had green stockings. 


It was a supper even better than before. The hobbits under 
the spell of Tom’s words may have missed one meal or many, 
but when the food was before them it seemed at least a week 
since they had eaten. They did not sing or even speak much 
for a while, and paid close attention to business. But after a 
time their hearts and spirits rose high again, and their voices 
rang out in mirth and laughter. 

After they had eaten, Goldberry sang many songs for them, 
songs that began merrily in the hills and fell softly down into 
silence; and in the silences they saw in their minds pools and 
waters wider than any they had known, and looking into them 
they saw the sky below them and the stars like jewels in the 
depths. Then once more she wished them each good night 
and left them by the fireside. But Tom now seemed wide 
awake and plied them with questions. 

He appeared already to know much about them and all 
their families, and indeed to know much of all the history 
and doings of the Shire down from days hardly remembered 
among the hobbits themselves. It no longer surprised them; 
but he made no secret that he owed his recent knowledge 
largely to Farmer Maggot, whom he seemed to regard as a 
person of more importance than they had imagined. “There’s 
earth under his old feet, and clay on his fingers; wisdom in 
his bones, and both his eyes are open,’ said Tom. It was also 
clear that Tom had dealings with the Elves, and it seemed 
that in some fashion, news had reached him from Gildor 
concerning the flight of Frodo. 

Indeed so much did Tom know, and so cunning was his 
questioning, that Frodo found himself telling him more about 
Bilbo and his own hopes and fears than he had told before 


174 THE FELLOWSHIP OF THE RING 


even to Gandalf. Tom wagged his head up and down, and 
there was a glint in his eyes when he heard of the Riders. 

‘Show me the precious Ring!’ he said suddenly in the midst 
of the story: and Frodo, to his own astonishment, drew out 
the chain from his pocket, and unfastening the Ring handed 
it at once to Tom. 

It seemed to grow larger as it lay for a moment on his big 
brown-skinned hand. Then suddenly he put it to his eye and 
laughed. For a second the hobbits had a vision, both comical 
and alarming, of his bright blue eye gleaming through a circle 
of gold. Then Tom put the Ring round the end of his little 
finger and held it up to the candlelight. For a moment 
the hobbits noticed nothing strange about this. Then they 
gasped. There was no sign of Tom disappearing! 

Tom laughed again, and then he spun the Ring in the air 
— and it vanished with a flash. Frodo gave a cry — and Tom 
leaned forward and handed it back to him with a smile. 

Frodo looked at it closely, and rather suspiciously (like one 
who has lent a trinket to a juggler). It was the same Ring, or 
looked the same and weighed the same: for that Ring had 
always seemed to Frodo to weigh strangely heavy in the hand. 
But something prompted him to make sure. He was perhaps 
a trifle annoyed with Tom for seeming to make so light of 
what even Gandalf thought so perilously important. He 
waited for an opportunity, when the talk was going again, 
and Tom was telling an absurd story about badgers and their 
queer ways — then he slipped the Ring on. 

Merry turned towards him to say something and gave a 
start, and checked an exclamation. Frodo was delighted (in 
a way): it was his own ring all right, for Merry was staring 
blankly at his chair, and obviously could not see him. He got 
up and crept quietly away from the fireside towards the outer 
door. 

‘Hey there!’ cried Tom, glancing towards him with a most 
seeing look in his shining eyes. ‘Hey! Come Frodo, there! 
Where be you a-going? Old Tom Bombadil’s not as blind as 
that yet. Take off your golden ring! Your hand’s more fair 


IN THE HOUSE OF TOM BOMBADIL 175 


without it. Come back! Leave your game and sit down beside 
me! We must talk a while more, and think about the morning. 
Tom must teach the right road, and keep your feet from 
wandering.’ 

Frodo laughed (trying to feel pleased), and taking off the 
Ring he came and sat down again. Tom now told them that 
he reckoned the Sun would shine tomorrow, and it would be 
a glad morning, and setting out would be hopeful. But they 
would do well to start early; for weather in that country was 
a thing that even Tom could not be sure of for long, and it 
would change sometimes quicker than he could change his 
jacket. ‘I am no weather-master,’ said he; ‘nor is aught that 
goes on two legs.’ 

By his advice they decided to make nearly due North from 
his house, over the western and lower slopes of the Downs: 
they might hope in that way to strike the East Road in a day’s 
journey, and avoid the Barrows. He told them not to be afraid 
— but to mind their own business. 

‘Keep to the green grass. Don’t you go a-meddling with 
old stone or cold Wights or prying in their houses, unless you 
be strong folk with hearts that never falter!’ He said this more 
than once; and he advised them to pass barrows by on the 
west-side, if they chanced to stray near one. Then he taught 
them a rhyme to sing, if they should by ill-luck fall into any 
danger or difficulty the next day. 


Ho! Tom Bombadil, Tom Bombadillo! 

By water, wood and hill, by the reed and willow, 
By fire, sun and moon, harken now and hear us! 
Come, Tom Bombadil, for our need is near us! 


When they had sung this altogether after him, he clapped 
them each on the shoulder with a laugh, and taking candles 
led them back to their bedroom. 


Chapter 8 


FOG ON THE BARROW-DOWNS 


That night they heard no noises. But either in his dreams or 
out of them, he could not tell which, Frodo heard a sweet 
singing running in his mind: a song that seemed to come like 
a pale light behind a grey rain-curtain, and growing stronger 
to turn the veil all to glass and silver, until at last it was rolled 
back, and a far green country opened before him under a 
swift sunrise. 

The vision melted into waking; and there was Tom whist- 
ling like a tree-full of birds; and the sun was already slanting 
down the hill and through the open window. Outside every- 
thing was green and pale gold. 

After breakfast, which they again ate alone, they made 
ready to say farewell, as nearly heavy of heart as was possible 
on such a morning: cool, bright, and clean under a washed 
autumn sky of thin blue. The air came fresh from the North- 
west. Their quiet ponies were almost frisky, sniffing and 
moving restlessly. Tom came out of the house and waved his 
hat and danced upon the doorstep, bidding the hobbits to 
get up and be off and go with good speed. 

They rode off along a path that wound away from behind 
the house, and went slanting up towards the north end of the 
hill-brow under which it sheltered. They had just dismounted 
to lead their ponies up the last steep slope, when suddenly 
Frodo stopped. 

‘Goldberry!’ he cried. ‘My fair lady, clad all in silver green! 
We have never said farewell to her, nor seen her since the 
evening!’ He was so distressed that he turned back; but at 
that moment a clear call came rippling down. There on the 
hill-brow she stood beckoning to them: her hair was flying 
loose, and as it caught the sun it shone and shimmered. A 


FOG ON THE BARROW-DOWNS 177 


light like the glint of water on dewy grass flashed from under 
her feet as she danced. 

They hastened up the last slope, and stood breathless 
beside her. They bowed, but with a wave of her arm she bade 
them look round; and they looked out from the hill-top over 
lands under the morning. It was now as clear and far-seen as 
it had been veiled and misty when they stood upon the knoll 
in the Forest, which could now be seen rising pale and green 
out of the dark trees in the West. In that direction the land 
rose in wooded ridges, green, yellow, russet under the sun, 
beyond which lay hidden the valley of the Brandywine. To 
the South, over the line of the Withywindle, there was a 
distant glint like pale glass where the Brandywine River made 
a great loop in the lowlands and flowed away out of the 
knowledge of the hobbits. Northward beyond the dwindling 
downs the land ran away in flats and swellings of grey and 
green and pale earth-colours, until it faded into a featureless 
and shadowy distance. Eastward the Barrow-downs rose, 
ridge behind ridge into the morning, and vanished out of 
eyesight into a guess: it was no more than a guess of blue and 
a remote white glimmer blending with the hem of the sky, 
but it spoke to them, out of memory and old tales, of the 
high and distant mountains. 

They took a deep draught of the air, and felt that a skip and 
a few stout strides would bear them wherever they wished. It 
seemed fainthearted to go jogging aside over the crumpled 
skirts of the downs towards the Road, when they should be 
leaping, as lusty as Tom, over the stepping stones of the hills 
straight towards the Mountains. 

Goldberry spoke to them and recalled their eyes and 
thoughts. ‘Speed now, fair guests!’ she said. ‘And hold to 
your purpose! North with the wind in the left eye and a 
blessing on your footsteps! Make haste while the Sun shines!’ 
And to Frodo she said: ‘Farewell, Elf-friend, it was a merry 
meeting!’ 

But Frodo found no words to answer. He bowed low, and 
mounted his pony, and followed by his friends jogged slowly 


178 THE FELLOWSHIP OF THE RING 


down the gentle slope behind the hill. Tom Bombadil’s house 
and the valley, and the Forest were lost to view. The air grew 
warmer between the green walls of hillside and hillside, and 
the scent of turf rose strong and sweet as they breathed. 
Turning back, when they reached the bottom of the green 
hollow, they saw Goldberry, now small and slender like a 
sunlit flower against the sky: she was standing still watching 
them, and her hands were stretched out towards them. As 
they looked she gave a clear call, and lifting up her hand she 
turned and vanished behind the hill. 


Their way wound along the floor of the hollow, and round 
the green feet of a steep hill into another deeper and broader 
valley, and then over the shoulders of further hills, and down 
their long limbs, and up their smooth sides again, up on to 
new hill-tops and down into new valleys. There was no tree 
nor any visible water: it was a country of grass and short 
springy turf, silent except for the whisper of the air over the 
edges of the land, and high lonely cries of strange birds. As 
they journeyed the sun mounted, and grew hot. Each time 
they climbed a ridge the breeze seemed to have grown less. 
When they caught a glimpse of the country westward the 
distant Forest seemed to be smoking, as if the fallen rain was 
steaming up again from leaf and root and mould. A shadow 
now lay round the edge of sight, a dark haze above which the 
upper sky was like a blue cap, hot and heavy. 

About mid-day they came to a hill whose top was wide 
and flattened, like a shallow saucer with a green mounded 
rim. Inside there was no air stirring, and the sky seemed near 
their heads. They rode across and looked northwards. Then 
their hearts rose; for it seemed plain that they had come 
further already than they had expected. Certainly the dis- 
tances had now all become hazy and deceptive, but there 
could be no doubt that the Downs were coming to an end. 
A long valley lay below them winding away northwards, until 
it came to an opening between two steep shoulders. Beyond, 
there seemed to be no more hills. Due north they faintly 


FOG ON THE BARROW-DOWNS 179 


glimpsed a long dark line. “That is a line of trees,’ said Merry, 
‘and that must mark the Road. All along it for many leagues 
east of the Bridge there are trees growing. Some say they 
were planted in the old days.’ 

‘Splendid!’ said Frodo. ‘If we make as good going this 
afternoon as we have done this morning, we shall have left 
the Downs before the Sun sets and be jogging on in search 
of a camping place.’ But even as he spoke he turned his 
glance eastwards, and he saw that on that side the hills were 
higher and looked down upon them; and all those hills were 
crowned with green mounds, and on some were standing 
stones, pointing upwards like jagged teeth out of green gums. 

That view was somehow disquieting; so they turned from 
the sight and went down into the hollow circle. In the midst 
of it there stood a single stone, standing tall under the sun 
above, and at this hour casting no shadow. It was shapeless 
and yet significant: like a landmark, or a guarding finger, or 
more like a warning. But they were now hungry, and the sun 
was still at the fearless noon; so they set their backs against 
the east side of the stone. It was cool, as if the sun had had 
no power to warm it; but at that time this seemed pleasant. 
There they took food and drink, and made as good a noon- 
meal under the open sky as anyone could wish; for the food 
came from ‘down under Hill’. Tom had provided them with 
plenty for the comfort of the day. Their ponies unburdened 
strayed upon the grass. 


Riding over the hills, and eating their fill, the warm sun 
and the scent of turf, lying a little too long, stretching out 
their legs and looking at the sky above their noses: these 
things are, perhaps, enough to explain what happened. How- 
ever that may be: they woke suddenly and uncomfortably 
from a sleep they had never meant to take. The standing 
stone was cold, and it cast a long pale shadow that stretched 
eastward over them. The sun, a pale and watery yellow, was 
gleaming through the mist just above the west wall of the 
hollow in which they lay; north, south, and east, beyond the 


180 THE FELLOWSHIP OF THE RING 


wall the fog was thick, cold and white. The air was silent, 
heavy and chill. Their ponies were standing crowded together 
with their heads down. 

The hobbits sprang to their feet in alarm, and ran to the 
western rim. They found that they were upon an island in 
the fog. Even as they looked out in dismay towards the setting 
sun, it sank before their eyes into a white sea, and a cold grey 
shadow sprang up in the East behind. The fog rolled up to 
the walls and rose above them, and as it mounted it bent over 
their heads until it became a roof: they were shut in a hall of 
mist whose central pillar was the standing stone. 

They felt as if a trap was closing about them; but they did 
not quite lose heart. They still remembered the hopeful view 
they had had of the line of the Road ahead, and they still 
knew in which direction it lay. In any case, they now had so 
great a dislike for that hollow place about the stone that no 
thought of remaining there was in their minds. They packed 
up as quickly as their chilled fingers would work. 

Soon they were leading their ponies in single file over the 
rim and down the long northward slope of the hill, down into 
a foggy sea. As they went down the mist became colder 
and damper, and their hair hung lank and dripping on their 
foreheads. When they reached the bottom it was so chill that 
they halted and got out cloaks and hoods, which soon became 
bedewed with grey drops. Then, mounting their ponies, they 
went slowly on again, feeling their way by the rise and fall of 
the ground. They were steering, as well as they could guess, 
for the gate-like opening at the far northward end of the long 
valley which they had seen in the morning. Once they were 
through the gap, they had only to keep on in anything like a 
straight line and they were bound in the end to strike the 
Road. Their thoughts did not go beyond that, except for a 
vague hope that perhaps away beyond the Downs there might 
be no fog. 


Their going was very slow. To prevent their getting separ- 
ated and wandering in different directions they went in file, 


FOG ON THE BARROW-DOWNS I81 


with Frodo leading. Sam was behind him, and after him came 
Pippin, and then Merry. The valley seemed to stretch on 
endlessly. Suddenly Frodo saw a hopeful sign. On either side 
ahead a darkness began to loom through the mist; and he 
guessed that they were at last approaching the gap in the 
hills, the north-gate of the Barrow-downs. If they could pass 
that, they would be free. 

‘Come on! Follow me!’ he called back over his shoulder, 
and he hurried forward. But his hope soon changed to bewil- 
derment and alarm. The dark patches grew darker, but they 
shrank; and suddenly he saw, towering ominous before him 
and leaning slightly towards one another like the pillars of 
a headless door, two huge standing stones. He could not 
remember having seen any sign of these in the valley, when 
he looked out from the hill in the morning. He had passed 
between them almost before he was aware: and even as he 
did so darkness seemed to fall round him. His pony reared 
and snorted, and he fell off. When he looked back he found 
that he was alone: the others had not followed him. 

‘Sam!’ he called. ‘Pippin! Merry! Come along! Why don’t 
you keep up?’ 

There was no answer. Fear took him, and he ran back past 
the stones shouting wildly: ‘Sam! Sam! Merry! Pippin!’ The 
pony bolted into the mist and vanished. From some way off, 
or so it seemed, he thought he heard a cry: ‘Hoy! Frodo! 
Hoy!’ It was away eastward, on his left as he stood under the 
great stones, staring and straining into the gloom. He plunged 
off in the direction of the call, and found himself going steeply 
uphill. 

As he struggled on he called again, and kept on calling 
more and more frantically; but he heard no answer for some 
time, and then it seemed faint and far ahead and high above 
him. ‘Frodo! Hoy!’ came the thin voices out of the mist: and 
then a cry that sounded like help, help! often repeated, ending 
with a last help! that trailed off into a long wail suddenly cut 
short. He stumbled forward with all the speed he could 
towards the cries; but the light was now gone, and clinging 


182 THE FELLOWSHIP OF THE RING 


night had closed about him, so that it was impossible to be 
sure of any direction. He seemed all the time to be climbing 
up and up. 

Only the change in the level of the ground at his feet told 
him when he at last came to the top of a ridge or hill. He was 
weary, sweating and yet chilled. It was wholly dark. 

‘Where are your’ he cried out miserably. 


There was no reply. He stood listening. He was suddenly 
aware that it was getting very cold, and that up here a wind 
was beginning to blow, an icy wind. A change was coming 
in the weather. The mist was flowing past him now in shreds 
and tatters. His breath was smoking, and the darkness was 
less near and thick. He looked up and saw with surprise 
that faint stars were appearing overhead amid the strands of 
hurrying cloud and fog. The wind began to hiss over the 
grass. 

He imagined suddenly that he caught a muffled cry, and 
he made towards it; and even as he went forward the mist was 
rolled up and thrust aside, and the starry sky was unveiled. A 
glance showed him that he was now facing southwards and 
was on a round hill-top, which he must have climbed from 
the north. Out of the east the biting wind was blowing. To 
his right there loomed against the westward stars a dark black 
shape. A great barrow stood there. 

‘Where are you?’ he cried again, both angry and afraid. 

‘Here!’ said a voice, deep and cold, that seemed to come 
out of the ground. ‘I am waiting for you!’ 

‘No!’ said Frodo; but he did not run away. His knees gave, 
and he fell on the ground. Nothing happened, and there was 
no sound. Trembling he looked up, in time to see a tall dark 
figure like a shadow against the stars. It leaned over him. He 
thought there were two eyes, very cold though lit with a pale 
light that seemed to come from some remote distance. Then 
a grip stronger and colder than iron seized him. The icy 
touch froze his bones, and he remembered no more. 

ok k ok 


FOG ON THE BARROW-DOWNS 183 


When he came to himself again, for a moment he could 
recall nothing except a sense of dread. Then suddenly he 
knew that he was imprisoned, caught hopelessly; he was in a 
barrow. A Barrow-wight had taken him, and he was probably 
already under the dreadful spells of the Barrow-wights about 
which whispered tales spoke. He dared not move, but lay as 
he found himself: flat on his back upon a cold stone with his 
hands on his breast. 

But though his fear was so great that it seemed to be part 
of the very darkness that was round him, he found himself 
as he lay thinking about Bilbo Baggins and his stories, of their 
jogging along together in the lanes of the Shire and talking 
about roads and adventures. There is a seed of courage 
hidden (often deeply, it is true) in the heart of the fattest 
and most timid hobbit, waiting for some final and desperate 
danger to make it grow. Frodo was neither very fat nor very 
timid; indeed, though he did not know it, Bilbo (and 
Gandalf) had thought him the best hobbit in the Shire. He 
thought he had come to the end of his adventure, and a 
terrible end, but the thought hardened him. He found himself 
stiffening, as if for a final spring; he no longer felt limp like a 
helpless prey. 

As he lay there, thinking and getting a hold of himself, he 
noticed all at once that the darkness was slowly giving way: 
a pale greenish light was growing round him. It did not at 
first show him what kind of a place he was in, for the light 
seemed to be coming out of himself, and from the floor beside 
him, and had not yet reached the roof or wall. He turned, and 
there in the cold glow he saw lying beside him Sam, Pippin, 
and Merry. They were on their backs, and their faces looked 
deathly pale; and they were clad in white. About them lay 
many treasures, of gold maybe, though in that light they 
looked cold and unlovely. On their heads were circlets, gold 
chains were about their waists, and on their fingers were many 
rings. Swords lay by their sides, and shields were at their feet. 
But across their three necks lay one long naked sword. 

ok k ok 


184 THE FELLOWSHIP OF THE RING 


Suddenly a song began: a cold murmur, rising and falling. 
The voice seemed far away and immeasurably dreary, some- 
times high in the air and thin, sometimes like a low moan 
from the ground. Out of the formless stream of sad but 
horrible sounds, strings of words would now and again shape 
themselves: grim, hard, cold words, heartless and miserable. 
The night was railing against the morning of which it was 
bereaved, and the cold was cursing the warmth for which it 
hungered. Frodo was chilled to the marrow. After a while the 
song became clearer, and with dread in his heart he perceived 
that it had changed into an incantation: 


Cold be hand and heart and bone, 

and cold be sleep under stone: 

never more to wake on stony bed, 

never, till the Sun fails and the Moon is dead. 
In the black wind the stars shall die, 

and still on gold here let them le, 

till the dark lord lifts his hand 

over dead sea and withered land. 


He heard behind his head a creaking and scraping sound. 
Raising himself on one arm he looked, and saw now in the 
pale light that they were in a kind of passage which behind 
them turned a corner. Round the corner a long arm was 
groping, walking on its fingers towards Sam, who was lying 
nearest, and towards the hilt of the sword that lay upon him. 

At first Frodo felt as if he had indeed been turned into 
stone by the incantation. Then a wild thought of escape came 
to him. He wondered if he put on the Ring, whether the 
Barrow-wight would miss him, and he might find some way 
out. He thought of himself running free over the grass, griev- 
ing for Merry, and Sam, and Pippin, but free and alive him- 
self. Gandalf would admit that there had been nothing else 
he could do. 

But the courage that had been awakened in him was now 
too strong: he could not leave his friends so easily. He 


FOG ON THE BARROW-DOWNS 185 


wavered, groping in his pocket, and then fought with himself 
again; and as he did so the arm crept nearer. Suddenly resolve 
hardened in him, and he seized a short sword that lay beside 
him, and kneeling he stooped low over the bodies of his 
companions. With what strength he had he hewed at the 
crawling arm near the wrist, and the hand broke off; but at 
the same moment the sword splintered up to the hilt. There 
was a shriek and the light vanished. In the dark there was a 
snarling noise. 

Frodo fell forward over Merry, and Merry’s face felt cold. 
All at once back into his mind, from which it had disappeared 
with the first coming of the fog, came the memory of the 
house down under the Hill, and of Tom singing. He re- 
membered the rhyme that Tom had taught them. In a small 
desperate voice he began: Ho! Tom Bombadil! and with that 
name his voice seemed to grow strong: it had a full and 
lively sound, and the dark chamber echoed as if to drum and 
trumpet. 


Ho! Tom Bombadil, Tom Bombadillo! 

By water, wood and hill, by the reed and willow, 
By fire, sun and moon, harken now and hear us! 
Come, Tom Bombadil, for our need is near us! 


There was a sudden deep silence, in which Frodo could 
hear his heart beating. After a long slow moment he heard 
plain, but far away, as if it was coming down through the 
ground or through thick walls, an answering voice singing: 


Old Tom Bombadil ts a merry fellow, 

Bright blue his jacket 1s, and his boots are yellow. 

None has ever caught him yet, for Tom, he ts the master: 
His songs are stronger songs, and his feet are faster. 


There was a loud rumbling sound, as of stones rolling and 
falling, and suddenly light streamed in, real light, the plain 
light of day. A low door-like opening appeared at the end of 


186 THE FELLOWSHIP OF THE RING 


the chamber beyond Frodo’s feet; and there was Tom’s head 
(hat, feather, and all) framed against the light of the sun 
rising red behind him. The light fell upon the floor, and upon 
the faces of the three hobbits lying beside Frodo. They did 
not stir, but the sickly hue had left them. They looked now 
as if they were only very deeply asleep. 

Tom stooped, removed his hat, and came into the dark 
chamber, singing: 


Get out, you old Wight! Vanish in the sunlight! 

Shrivel like the cold mist, like the winds go wailing, 

Out into the barren lands far beyond the mountains! 
Come never here again! Leave your barrow empty! 

Lost and forgotten be, darker than the darkness, 

Where gates stand for ever shut, till the world 1s mended. 


At these words there was a cry and part of the inner end 
of the chamber fell in with a crash. Then there was a long 
trailing shriek, fading away into an unguessable distance; and 
after that silence. 

‘Come, friend Frodo!’ said Tom. ‘Let us get out on to 
clean grass! You must help me bear them.’ 

Together they carried out Merry, Pippin, and Sam. As 
Frodo left the barrow for the last time he thought he saw a 
severed hand wriggling still, like a wounded spider, in a heap 
of fallen earth. Tom went back in again, and there was a 
sound of much thumping and stamping. When he came out 
he was bearing in his arms a great load of treasure: things of 
gold, silver, copper, and bronze; many beads and chains and 
jewelled ornaments. He climbed the green barrow and laid 
them all on top in the sunshine. 

There he stood, with his hat in his hand and the wind in 
his hair, and looked down upon the three hobbits, that had 
been laid on their backs upon the grass at the west side of 
the mound. Raising his right hand he said in a clear and 
commanding voice: 


FOG ON THE BARROW-DOWNS 187 


Wake now my merry lads! Wake and hear me calling! 
Warm now be heart and limb! The cold stone 1s fallen; 
Dark door ts standing wide; dead hand is broken. 
Night under Night is flown, and the Gate is open! 


To Frodo’s great joy the hobbits stirred, stretched their 
arms, rubbed their eyes, and then suddenly sprang up. They 
looked about in amazement, first at Frodo, and then at Tom 
standing large as life on the barrow-top above them; and then 
at themselves in their thin white rags, crowned and belted 
with pale gold, and jingling with trinkets. 

‘What in the name of wonder?’ began Merry, feeling the 
golden circlet that had slipped over one eye. Then he 
stopped, and a shadow came over his face, and he closed his 
eyes. ‘Of course, I remember!’ he said. “The men of Carn 
Dim came on us at night, and we were worsted. Ah! the 
spear in my heart!’ He clutched at his breast. “No! No!’ he 
said, opening his eyes. ‘What am I saying? I have been dream- 
ing. Where did you get to, Frodo?’ 

‘T thought that I was lost,’ said Frodo; ‘but I don’t want 
to speak of it. Let us think of what we are to do now! Let us 
go on!’ 

‘Dressed up like this, sir?’ said Sam. ‘Where are my 
clothes?’ He flung his circlet, belt, and rings on the grass, and 
looked round helplessly, as if he expected to find his cloak, 
jacket, and breeches, and other hobbit-garments lying some- 
where to hand. 

“You won't find your clothes again,’ said Tom, bounding 
down from the mound, and laughing as he danced round 
them in the sunlight. One would have thought that nothing 
dangerous or dreadful had happened; and indeed the horror 
faded out of their hearts as they looked at him, and saw the 
merry glint in his eyes. 

‘What do you mean?’ asked Pippin, looking at him, half 
puzzled and half amused. ‘Why not?’ 

But Tom shook his head, saying: ‘You’ve found your- 
selves again, out of the deep water. Clothes are but little loss, 


188 THE FELLOWSHIP OF THE RING 


if you escape from drowning. Be glad, my merry friends, 
and let the warm sunlight heat now heart and limb! Cast off 
these cold rags! Run naked on the grass, while Tom goes 
a-hunting!”’ 

He sprang away down hill, whistling and calling. Looking 
down after him Frodo saw him running away southwards 
along the green hollow between their hill and the next, still 
whistling and crying: 


Hey! now! Come hoy now! Whither do you wander? 
Up, down, near or far, here, there or yonder? 
Sharp-ears, Wise-nose, Swish-tail and Bumpkin, 
White-socks my little lad, and old Fatty Lumpkin! 


So he sang, running fast, tossing up his hat and catching 
it, until he was hidden by a fold of the ground: but for some 
time his hey now! hoy now! came floating back down the wind, 
which had shifted round towards the south. 


The air was growing very warm again. The hobbits ran 
about for a while on the grass, as he told them. Then they 
lay basking in the sun with the delight of those that have been 
wafted suddenly from bitter winter to a friendly clime, or of 
people that, after being long ill and bedridden, wake one day 
to find that they are unexpectedly well and the day is again 
full of promise. 

By the time that Tom returned they were feeling strong 
(and hungry). He reappeared, hat first, over the brow of the 
hill, and behind him came in an obedient line s7x ponies: 
their own five and one more. The last was plainly old Fatty 
Lumpkin: he was larger, stronger, fatter (and older) than 
their own ponies. Merry, to whom the others belonged, had 
not, in fact, given them any such names, but they answered 
to the new names that Tom had given them for the rest of 
their lives. Tom called them one by one and they climbed 
over the brow and stood in a line. Then Tom bowed to the 
hobbits. 


FOG ON THE BARROW-DOWNS 189 


‘Here are your ponies, now!” he said. “They’ve more sense 
Gin some ways) than you wandering hobbits have — more 
sense in their noses. For they sniff danger ahead which you 
walk right into; and if they run to save themselves, then they 
run the right way. You must forgive them all; for though their 
hearts are faithful, to face fear of Barrow-wights is not what 
they were made for. See, here they come again, bringing all 
their burdens!’ 

Merry, Sam, and Pippin now clothed themselves in spare 
garments from their packs; and they soon felt too hot, for 
they were obliged to put on some of the thicker and warmer 
things that they had brought against the oncoming of winter. 

‘Where does that other old animal, that Fatty Lumpkin, 
come from?’ asked Frodo. 

‘He’s mine,’ said Tom. ‘My four-legged friend; though I 
seldom ride him, and he wanders often far, free upon the 
hillsides. When your ponies stayed with me, they got to know 
my Lumpkin; and they smelt him in the night, and quickly 
ran to meet him. I thought he’d look for them and with his 
words of wisdom take all their fear away. But now, my jolly 
Lumpkin, old Tom’s going to ride. Hey! he’s coming with 
you, just to set you on the road; so he needs a pony. For you 
cannot easily talk to hobbits that are riding, when you’re on 
your own legs trying to trot beside them.’ 

The hobbits were delighted to hear this, and thanked Tom 
many times; but he laughed, and said that they were so good 
at losing themselves that he would not feel happy till he had 
seen them safe over the borders of his land. ‘Pve got things 
to do,’ he said: ‘my making and my singing, my talking and 
my walking, and my watching of the country. Tom can’t be 
always near to open doors and willow-cracks. Tom has his 
house to mind, and Goldberry is waiting.’ 


It was still fairly early by the sun, something between nine 
and ten, and the hobbits turned their minds to food. Their 
last meal had been lunch beside the standing stone the day 
before. They breakfasted now off the remainder of Tom’s 


190 THE FELLOWSHIP OF THE RING 


provisions, meant for their supper, with additions that Tom 
had brought with him. It was not a large meal (considering 
hobbits and the circumstances), but they felt much better for 
it. While they were eating ‘om went up to the mound, and 
looked through the treasures. Most of these he made into a 
pile that glistered and sparkled on the grass. He bade them 
lie there ‘free to all finders, birds, beasts, Elves or Men, and 
all kindly creatures’; for so the spell of the mound should be 
broken and scattered and no Wight ever come back to it. He 
chose for himself from the pile a brooch set with blue stones, 
many-shaded like flax-flowers or the wings of blue butterflies. 
He looked long at it, as if stirred by some memory, shaking 
his head, and saying at last: 

‘Here is a pretty toy for Tom and for his lady! Fair was 
she who long ago wore this on her shoulder. Goldberry shall 
wear it now, and we will not forget her!’ 

For each of the hobbits he chose a dagger, long, leaf- 
shaped, and keen, of marvellous workmanship, damasked 
with serpent-forms in red and gold. They gleamed as he 
drew them from their black sheaths, wrought of some strange 
metal, light and strong, and set with many fiery stones. 
Whether by some virtue in these sheaths or because of the 
spell that lay on the mound, the blades seemed untouched 
by time, unrusted, sharp, glittering in the sun. 

‘Old knives are long enough as swords for hobbit-people,’ 
he said. ‘Sharp blades are good to have, if Shire-folk go 
walking, east, south, or far away into dark and danger.’ Then 
he told them that these blades were forged many long years 
ago by Men of Westernesse: they were foes of the Dark Lord, 
but they were overcome by the evil king of Carn Dim in the 
Land of Angmar. 

‘Few now remember them,’ Tom murmured, ‘yet still 
some go wandering, sons of forgotten kings walking in lone- 
liness, guarding from evil things folk that are heedless.’ 

The hobbits did not understand his words, but as he spoke 
they had a vision as it were of a great expanse of years behind 
them, like a vast shadowy plain over which there strode 


FOG ON THE BARROW-DOWNS I9I 


shapes of Men, tall and grim with bright swords, and last 
came one with a star on his brow. Then the vision faded, and 
they were back in the sunlit world. It was time to start again. 
They made ready, packing their bags and lading their ponies. 
Their new weapons they hung on their leather belts under 
their jackets, feeling them very awkward, and wondering if 
they would be of any use. Fighting had not before occurred 
to any of them as one of the adventures in which their flight 
would land them. 


At last they set off. They led their ponies down the hill; 
and then mounting they trotted quickly along the valley. They 
looked back and saw the top of the old mound on the hill, 
and from it the sunlight on the gold went up like a yellow 
flame. Then they turned a shoulder of the Downs and it was 
hidden from view. 

Though Frodo looked about him on every side he saw no 
sign of the great stones standing like a gate, and before long 
they came to the northern gap and rode swiftly through, and 
the land fell away before them. It was a merry journey with 
Tom Bombadil trotting gaily beside them, or before them, 
on Fatty Lumpkin, who could move much faster than his 
girth promised. Tom sang most of the time, but it was chiefly 
nonsense, or else perhaps a strange language unknown to the 
hobbits, an ancient language whose words were mainly those 
of wonder and delight. 

They went forward steadily, but they soon saw that the 
Road was further away than they had imagined. Even without 
a fog, their sleep at mid-day would have prevented them from 
reaching it until after nightfall on the day before. The dark 
line they had seen was not a line of trees but a line of bushes 
growing on the edge of a deep dike with a steep wall on the 
further side. Tom said that it had once been the boundary of 
a kingdom, but a very long time ago. He seemed to remember 
something sad about it, and would not say much. 

They climbed down and out of the dike and through a gap 
in the wall, and then Tom turned due north, for they had 


192 THE FELLOWSHIP OF THE RING 


been bearing somewhat to the west. The land was now open 
and fairly level, and they quickened their pace, but the sun 
was already sinking low when at last they saw a line of tall 
trees ahead, and they knew that they had come back to the 
Road after many unexpected adventures. They galloped their 
ponies over the last furlongs, and halted under the long 
shadows of the trees. They were on the top of a sloping bank, 
and the Road, now dim as evening drew on, wound away 
below them. At this point it ran nearly from South-west to 
North-east, and on their right it fell quickly down into a wide 
hollow. It was rutted and bore many signs of the recent heavy 
rain; there were pools and pot-holes full of water. 

They rode down the bank and looked up and down. There 
was nothing to be seen. ‘Well, here we are again at last!’ said 
Frodo. ‘I suppose we haven’t lost more than two days by my 
short cut through the Forest! But perhaps the delay will prove 
useful — it may have put them off our trail.’ 

The others looked at him. The shadow of the fear of the 
Black Riders came suddenly over them again. Ever since they 
had entered the Forest they had thought chiefly of getting 
back to the Road; only now when it lay beneath their feet did 
they remember the danger which pursued them, and was 
more than likely to be lying in wait for them upon the Road 
itself. They looked anxiously back towards the setting sun, 
but the Road was brown and empty. 

‘Do you think,’ asked Pippin hesitatingly, ‘do you think we 
may be pursued, tonight?’ 

‘No, I hope not tonight,’ answered Tom Bombadil; ‘nor 
perhaps the next day. But do not trust my guess; for I cannot 
tell for certain. Out east my knowledge fails. Tom is not 
master of Riders from the Black Land far beyond his 
country.’ 

All the same the hobbits wished he was coming with them. 
They felt that he would know how to deal with Black Riders, 
if anyone did. They would soon now be going forward into 
lands wholly strange to them, and beyond all but the most 
vague and distant legends of the Shire, and in the gathering 


FOG ON THE BARROW-DOWNS 193 


twilight they longed for home. A deep loneliness and sense 
of loss was on them. They stood silent, reluctant to make the 
final parting, and only slowly became aware that Tom was 
wishing them farewell, and telling them to have good heart 
and to ride on till dark without halting. 

“Tom will give you good advice, till this day is over (after 
that your own luck must go with you and guide you): four 
miles along the Road you’ll come upon a village, Bree under 
Bree-hill, with doors looking westward. There you'll find an 
old inn that is called The Prancing Pony. Barliman Butterbur 
is the worthy keeper. There you can stay the night, and 
afterwards the morning will speed you upon your way. Be 
bold, but wary! Keep up your merry hearts, and ride to meet 
your fortune!’ 

They begged him to come at least as far as the inn and 
drink once more with them; but he laughed and refused, 
saying: 


Tom’s country ends here: he will not pass the borders. 
Tom has his house to mind, and Goldberry is waiting! 


Then he turned, tossed up his hat, leaped on Lumpkin’s 
back, and rode up over the bank and away singing into the 
dusk. 

The hobbits climbed up and watched him until he was out 
of sight. 

‘I am sorry to take leave of Master Bombadil,’ said Sam. 
‘He’s a caution and no mistake. I reckon we may go a good 
deal further and see naught better, nor queerer. But I won’t 
deny I'll be glad to see this Prancing Pony he spoke of. I hope 
itll be like The Green Dragon away back home! What sort of 
folk are they in Bree?’ 

“There are hobbits in Bree,’ said Merry, ‘as well as Big 
Folk. I daresay it will be homelike enough. The Pony is a good 
inn by all accounts. My people ride out there now and again.’ 

‘It may be all we could wish,’ said Frodo; ‘but it is outside 
the Shire all the same. Don’t make yourselves too much at 


194 THE FELLOWSHIP OF THE RING 


home! Please remember — all of you — that the name of 
Baggins must NOT be mentioned. Iam Mr. Underhill, if any 
name must be given.’ 

They now mounted their ponies and rode off silently into 
the evening. Darkness came down quickly, as they plodded 
slowly downhill and up again, until at last they saw lights 
twinkling some distance ahead. 

Before them rose Bree-hill barring the way, a dark mass 
against misty stars; and under its western flank nestled a large 
village. Towards it they now hurried desiring only to find a 
fire, and a door between them and the night. 


Chapter 9 


AT THE SIGN OF THE PRANCING PONY 


Bree was the chief village of the Bree-land, a small inhabited 
region, like an island in the empty lands round about. Besides 
Bree itself, there was Staddle on the other side of the hill, 
Combe in a deep valley a little further eastward, and Archet 
on the edge of the Chetwood. Lying round Bree-hill and the 
villages was a small country of fields and tamed woodland 
only a few miles broad. 

The Men of Bree were brown-haired, broad, and rather 
short, cheerful and independent: they belonged to nobody 
but themselves; but they were more friendly and familiar with 
Hobbits, Dwarves, Elves, and other inhabitants of the world 
about them than was (or is) usual with Big People. According 
to their own tales they were the original inhabitants and were 
the descendants of the first Men that ever wandered into the 
West of the middle-world. Few had survived the turmoils of 
the Elder Days; but when the Kings returned again over the 
Great Sea they had found the Bree-men still there, and they 
were still there now, when the memory of the old Kings had 
faded into the grass. 

In those days no other Men had settled dwellings so far 
west, or within a hundred leagues of the Shire. But in the 
wild lands beyond Bree there were mysterious wanderers. 
The Bree-folk called them Rangers, and knew nothing of 
their origin. They were taller and darker than the Men of 
Bree and were believed to have strange powers of sight 
and hearing, and to understand the languages of beasts 
and birds. They roamed at will southwards, and eastwards 
even as far as the Misty Mountains; but they were now 
few and rarely seen. When they appeared they brought 
news from afar, and told strange forgotten tales which were 


196 THE FELLOWSHIP OF THE RING 


eagerly listened to; but the Bree-folk did not make friends 
of them. 

There were also many families of hobbits in the Bree-land; 
and they claimed to be the oldest settlement of Hobbits in the 
world, one that was founded long before even the Brandy- 
wine was crossed and the Shire colonized. They lived mostly 
in Staddle though there were some in Bree itself, especially 
on the higher slopes of the hill, above the houses of the Men. 
The Big Folk and the Little Folk (as they called one another) 
were on friendly terms, minding their own affairs in their 
own ways, but both rightly regarding themselves as necessary 
parts of the Bree-folk. Nowhere else in the world was this 
peculiar (but excellent) arrangement to be found. 

The Bree-folk, Big and Little, did not themselves travel 
much; and the affairs of the four villages were their chief 
concern. Occasionally the Hobbits of Bree went as far as 
Buckland, or the Eastfarthing; but though their little land was 
not much further than a day’s riding east of the Brandywine 
Bridge, the Hobbits of the Shire now seldom visited it. An 
occasional Bucklander or adventurous Took would come out 
to the Inn for a night or two, but even that was becoming 
less and less usual. The Shire-hobbits referred to those of 
Bree, and to any others that lived beyond the borders, as 
Outsiders, and took very little interest in them, considering 
them dull and uncouth. There were probably many more 
Outsiders scattered about in the West of the World in those 
days than the people of the Shire imagined. Some, doubtless, 
were no better than tramps, ready to dig a hole in any bank 
and stay only as long as it suited them. But in the Bree-land, 
at any rate, the hobbits were decent and prosperous, and no 
more rustic than most of their distant relatives Inside. It was 
not yet forgotten that there had been a time when there was 
much coming and going between the Shire and Bree. There 
was Bree-blood in the Brandybucks by all accounts. 


The village of Bree had some hundred stone houses of the 
Big Folk, mostly above the Road, nestling on the hillside with 


AT THE SIGN OF THE PRANCING PONY 197 


windows looking west. On that side, running in more than 
half a circle from the hill and back to it, there was a deep dike 
with a thick hedge on the inner side. Over this the Road 
crossed by a causeway; but where it pierced the hedge it was 
barred by a great gate. There was another gate in the southern 
corner where the Road ran out of the village. The gates were 
closed at nightfall; but just inside them were small lodges for 
the gatekeepers. 

Down on the Road, where it swept to the right to go round 
the foot of the hill, there was a large inn. It had been built 
long ago when the traffic on the roads had been far greater. 
For Bree stood at an old meeting of ways; another ancient 
road crossed the East Road just outside the dike at the western 
end of the village, and in former days Men and other folk 
of various sorts had travelled much on it. Strange as News 
from Bree was still a saying in the Eastfarthing, descending 
from those days, when news from North, South, and East 
could be heard in the inn, and when the Shire-hobbits 
used to go more often to hear it. But the Northern Lands 
had long been desolate, and the North Road was now seldom 
used: it was grass-grown, and the Bree-folk called it the 
Greenway. 

The Inn of Bree was still there, however, and the innkeeper 
was an important person. His house was a meeting place for 
the idle, talkative, and inquisitive among the inhabitants, large 
and small, of the four villages; and a resort of Rangers and 
other wanderers, and for such travellers (mostly dwarves) as 
still journeyed on the East Road, to and from the Mountains. 


It was dark, and white stars were shining, when Frodo and 
his companions came at last to the Greenway-crossing and 
drew near the village. They came to the West-gate and found 
it shut; but at the door of the lodge beyond it, there was a 
man sitting. He jumped up and fetched a lantern and looked 
over the gate at them in surprise. 

‘What do you want, and where do you come from?’ he 
asked gruffly. 


198 THE FELLOWSHIP OF THE RING 


‘We are making for the inn here,’ answered Frodo. ‘We 
are journeying east and cannot go further tonight.’ 

‘Hobbits! Four hobbits! And what’s more, out of the Shire 
by their talk,’ said the gatekeeper, softly as if speaking to 
himself. He stared at them darkly for a moment, and then 
slowly opened the gate and let them ride through. 

‘We don’t often see Shire-folk riding on the Road at night,’ 
he went on, as they halted a moment by his door. ‘You'll 
pardon my wondering what business takes you away east of 
Bree! What may your names be, might I ask?’ 

‘Our names and our business are our own, and this does 
not seem a good place to discuss them,’ said Frodo, not liking 
the look of the man or the tone of his voice. 

“Your business is your own, no doubt,’ said the man; ‘but 
it’s my business to ask questions after nightfall.’ 

‘We are hobbits from Buckland, and we have a fancy to 
travel and to stay at the inn here,’ put in Merry. ‘I am Mr. 
Brandybuck. Is that enough for you? The Bree-folk used to 
be fair-spoken to travellers, or so I had heard.’ 

‘All right, all right!’ said the man. ‘I meant no offence. But 
you'll find maybe that more folk than old Harry at the gate 
will be asking you questions. There’s queer folk about. If you 
go on to The Pony, you'll find you’re not the only guests.’ 

He wished them good night, and they said no more; but 
Frodo could see in the lantern-light that the man was still 
eyeing them curiously. He was glad to hear the gate clang to 
behind them, as they rode forward. He wondered why the 
man was so suspicious, and whether anyone had been asking 
for news of a party of hobbits. Could it have been Gandalf? 
He might have arrived, while they were delayed in the Forest 
and the Downs. But there was something in the look and the 
voice of the gatekeeper that made him uneasy. 

The man stared after the hobbits for a moment, and then 
he went back to his house. As soon as his back was turned, a 
dark figure climbed quickly in over the gate and melted into 
the shadows of the village street. 

ok * ok 


AT THE SIGN OF THE PRANCING PONY 199 


The hobbits rode on up a gentle slope, passing a few 
detached houses, and drew up outside the inn. The houses 
looked large and strange to them. Sam stared up at the inn with 
its three storeys and many windows, and felt his heart sink. 
He had imagined himself meeting giants taller than trees, and 
other creatures even more terrifying, some time or other in the 
course of his journey; but at the moment he was finding his 
first sight of Men and their tall houses quite enough, indeed 
too much for the dark end of a tiring day. He pictured black 
horses standing all saddled in the shadows of the inn-yard, 
and Black Riders peering out of dark upper windows. 

‘We surely aren’t going to stay here for the night, are we, 
sir?’ he exclaimed. ‘If there are hobbit-folk in these parts, 
why don’t we look for some that would be willing to take us 
in? It would be more homelike.’ 

‘What’s wrong with the inn?’ said Frodo. “Tom Bombadil 
recommended it. I expect it’s homelike enough inside.’ 

Even from the outside the inn looked a pleasant house to 
familiar eyes. It had a front on the Road, and two wings 
running back on land partly cut out of the lower slopes of 
the hill, so that at the rear the second-floor windows were 
level with the ground. There was a wide arch leading to a 
courtyard between the two wings, and on the left under the 
arch there was a large doorway reached by a few broad steps. 
The door was open and light streamed out of it. Above the 
arch there was a lamp, and beneath it swung a large sign- 
board: a fat white pony reared up on its hind legs. Over the 
door was painted in white letters: THE PRANCING PONY by 
BARLIMAN BUTTERBUR. Many of the lower windows showed 
lights behind thick curtains. 

As they hesitated outside in the gloom, someone began 
singing a merry song inside, and many cheerful voices joined 
loudly in the chorus. They listened to this encouraging sound 
for a moment and then got off their ponies. The song ended 
and there was a burst of laughter and clapping. 

They led their ponies under the arch, and leaving them 
standing in the yard they climbed up the steps. Frodo went 


200 THE FELLOWSHIP OF THE RING 


forward and nearly bumped into a short fat man with a bald 
head and a red face. He had a white apron on, and was 
bustling out of one door and in through another, carrying a 
tray laden with full mugs. 

‘Can we ’ began Frodo. 

‘Half a minute, if you please!’ shouted the man over his 
shoulder, and vanished into a babel of voices and a cloud of 
smoke. In a moment he was out again, wiping his hands on 
his apron. 

‘Good evening, little master!’ he said, bending down. ‘What 
may you be wanting?’ 

‘Beds for four, and stabling for five ponies, if that can be 
managed. Are you Mr. Butterbur?’ 

“That’s right! Barliman is my name. Barliman Butterbur at 
your service! You’re from the Shire, eh?’ he said, and then 
suddenly he clapped his hand to his forehead, as if trying to 
remember something. ‘Hobbits!’ he cried. ‘Now what does 
that remind me of? Might I ask your names, sirs?’ 

‘Mr. Took and Mr. Brandybuck,’ said Frodo; ‘and this is 
Sam Gamgee. My name is Underhill.’ 

“There now!’ said Mr. Butterbur, snapping his fingers. ‘It’s 
gone again! But itll come back, when I have time to think. 
I’m run off my feet; but Pll see what I can do for you. We 
don’t often get a party out of the Shire nowadays, and I 
should be sorry not to make you welcome. But there is such 
a crowd already in the house tonight as there hasn’t been for 
long enough. It never rains but it pours, we say in Bree.’ 

“Hi! Nob!’ he shouted. ‘Where are you, you woolly-footed 
slowcoach? Nob!’ 

‘Coming, sir! Coming!’ A cheery-looking hobbit bobbed 
out of a door, and seeing the travellers, stopped short and 
stared at them with great interest. 

“‘Where’s Bob?’ asked the landlord. ‘You don’t know? Well, 
find him! Double sharp! I haven’t got six legs, nor six eyes 
neither! Tell Bob there’s five ponies that have to be stabled. 
He must find room somehow.’ Nob trotted off with a grin 
and a wink. 


AT THE SIGN OF THE PRANCING PONY 201 


‘Well now, what was I going to say?’ said Mr. Butterbur, 
tapping his forehead. ‘One thing drives out another, so to 
speak. ’m that busy tonight, my head is going round. There’s 
a party that came up the Greenway from down South last 
night — and that was strange enough to begin with. Then 
there’s a travelling company of dwarves going West come in 
this evening. And now there’s you. If you weren’t hobbits, I 
doubt if we could house you. But we’ve got a room or two 
in the north wing that were made special for hobbits, when 
this place was built. On the ground floor as they usually 
prefer; round windows and all as they like it. I hope you'll be 
comfortable. You’ll be wanting supper, I don’t doubt. As 
soon as may be. This way now!’ 

He led them a short way down a passage, and opened 
a door. ‘Here is a nice little parlour!’ he said. ‘I hope it will 
suit. Excuse me now. I’m that busy. No time for talking. I 
must be trotting. It’s hard work for two legs, but I don’t get 
thinner. I'll look in again later. If you want anything, ring the 
hand-bell, and Nob will come. If he don’t come, ring and 
shout!’ 

Off he went at last, and left them feeling rather breathless. 
He seemed capable of an endless stream of talk, however 
busy he might be. They found themselves in a small and cosy 
room. There was a bit of bright fire burning on the hearth, 
and in front of it were some low and comfortable chairs. 
There was a round table, already spread with a white cloth, 
and on it was a large hand-bell. But Nob, the hobbit servant, 
came bustling in long before they thought of ringing. He 
brought candles and a tray full of plates. 

‘Will you be wanting anything to drink, masters?’ he asked. 
‘And shall I show you the bedrooms, while your supper is 
got ready?’ 

They were washed and in the middle of good deep mugs 
of beer when Mr. Butterbur and Nob came in again. In a 
twinkling the table was laid. There was hot soup, cold meats, 
a blackberry tart, new loaves, slabs of butter, and half a ripe 
cheese: good plain food, as good as the Shire could show, 


202 THE FELLOWSHIP OF THE RING 


and homelike enough to dispel the last of Sam’s misgivings 
(already much relieved by the excellence of the beer). 

The landlord hovered round for a little, and then prepared 
to leave them. ‘I don’t know whether you would care to join 
the company, when you have supped,’ he said, standing 
at the door. ‘Perhaps you would rather go to your beds. Still 
the company would be very pleased to welcome you, if 
you had a mind. We don’t get Outsiders — travellers from 
the Shire, I should say, begging your pardon — often; and we 
like to hear a bit of news, or any story or song you may 
have in mind. But as you please! Ring the bell, if you lack 
anything!’ 

So refreshed and encouraged did they feel at the end of 
their supper (about three quarters of an hour’s steady going, 
not hindered by unnecessary talk) that Frodo, Pippin, and 
Sam decided to join the company. Merry said it would be 
too stuffy. ‘I shall sit here quietly by the fire for a bit, and 
perhaps go out later for a sniff of the air. Mind your Ps and 
Qs, and don’t forget that you are supposed to be escaping in 
secret, and are still on the high-road and not very far from 
the Shire!’ 

‘All right!’ said Pippin. ‘Mind yourself! Don’t get lost, and 
don’t forget that it is safer indoors!’ 


The company was in the big common-room of the inn. 
The gathering was large and mixed, as Frodo discovered, 
when his eyes got used to the light. This came chiefly from 
a blazing log-fire, for the three lamps hanging from the beams 
were dim, and half veiled in smoke. Barliman Butterbur was 
standing near the fire, talking to a couple of dwarves and one 
or two strange-looking men. On the benches were various 
folk: men of Bree, a collection of local hobbits (sitting 
chattering together), a few more dwarves, and other vague 
figures difficult to make out away in the shadows and corners. 

As soon as the Shire-hobbits entered, there was a chorus 
of welcome from the Bree-landers. The strangers, especially 
those that had come up the Greenway, stared at them 


AT THE SIGN OF THE PRANCING PONY 203 


curiously. The landlord introduced the newcomers to the 
Bree-folk, so quickly that, though they caught many names, 
they were seldom sure who the names belonged to. The Men 
of Bree seemed all to have rather botanical (and to the Shire- 
folk rather odd) names, like Rushlight, Goatleaf, Heather- 
toes, Appledore, Thistlewool and Ferny (not to mention 
Butterbur). Some of the hobbits had similar names. The 
Mugworts, for instance, seemed numerous. But most of them 
had natural names, such as Banks, Brockhouse, Longholes, 
Sandheaver, and Tunnelly, many of which were used in the 
Shire. There were several Underhills from Staddle, and as 
they could not imagine sharing a name without being related, 
they took Frodo to their hearts as a long-lost cousin. 

The Bree-hobbits were, in fact, friendly and inquisitive, 
and Frodo soon found that some explanation of what he was 
doing would have to be given. He gave out that he was 
interested in history and geography (at which there was much 
wagging of heads, although neither of these words were 
much used in the Bree-dialect). He said he was thinking of 
writing a book (at which there was silent astonishment), and 
that he and his friends wanted to collect information about 
hobbits living outside the Shire, especially in the eastern 
lands. 

At this a chorus of voices broke out. If Frodo had really 
wanted to write a book, and had had many ears, he would 
have learned enough for several chapters in a few minutes. 
And if that was not enough, he was given a whole list of 
names, beginning with ‘Old Barliman here’, to whom he 
could go for further information. But after a time, as Frodo 
did not show any sign of writing a book on the spot, the 
hobbits returned to their questions about doings in the 
Shire. Frodo did not prove very communicative, and he soon 
found himself sitting alone in a corner, listening and looking 
around. 

The Men and Dwarves were mostly talking of distant 
events and telling news of a kind that was becoming only too 
familiar. There was trouble away in the South, and it seemed 


204 THE FELLOWSHIP OF THE RING 


that the Men who had come up the Greenway were on the 
move, looking for lands where they could find some peace. 
The Bree-folk were sympathetic, but plainly not very ready 
to take a large number of strangers into their little land. One 
of the travellers, a squint-eyed ill-favoured fellow, was fore- 
telling that more and more people would be coming north in 
the near future. ‘If room isn’t found for them, they'll find it 
for themselves. They’ve a right to live, same as other folk,’ 
he said loudly. The local inhabitants did not look pleased at 
the prospect. 

The hobbits did not pay much attention to all this, as it 
did not at the moment seem to concern hobbits. Big Folk 
could hardly beg for lodgings in hobbit-holes. They were 
more interested in Sam and Pippin, who were now feeling 
quite at home, and were chatting gaily about events in the 
Shire. Pippin roused a good deal of laughter with an account 
of the collapse of the roof of the Town Hole in Michel 
Delving: Will Whitfoot, the Mayor, and the fattest hobbit in 
the Westfarthing, had been buried in chalk, and came out 
like a floured dumpling. But there were several questions 
asked that made Frodo a little uneasy. One of the Bree- 
landers, who seemed to have been in the Shire several times, 
wanted to know where the Underhills lived and who they 
were related to. 

Suddenly Frodo noticed that a strange-looking weather- 
beaten man, sitting in the shadows near the wall, was also 
listening intently to the hobbit-talk. He had a tall tankard in 
front of him, and was smoking a long-stemmed pipe curiously 
carved. His legs were stretched out before him, showing high 
boots of supple leather that fitted him well, but had seen 
much wear and were now caked with mud. A travel-stained 
cloak of heavy dark-green cloth was drawn close about him, 
and in spite of the heat of the room he wore a hood that 
overshadowed his face; but the gleam of his eyes could be 
seen as he watched the hobbits. 

‘Who is that?’ Frodo asked, when he got a chance to whis- 
per to Mr. Butterbur. ‘I don’t think you introduced him?’ 


AT THE SIGN OF THE PRANCING PONY 205 


‘Him?’ said the landlord in an answering whisper, cocking 
an eye without turning his head. ‘I don’t rightly know. He is 
one of the wandering folk — Rangers we call them. He seldom 
talks: not but what he can tell a rare tale when he has the 
mind. He disappears for a month, or a year, and then he 
pops up again. He was in and out pretty often last spring; 
but I haven’t seen him about lately. What his right name is 
Ive never heard: but he’s known round here as Strider. Goes 
about at a great pace on his long shanks; though he don’t tell 
nobody what cause he has to hurry. But there’s no accounting 
for East and West, as we say in Bree, meaning the Rangers 
and the Shire-folk, begging your pardon. Funny you should 
ask about him.’ But at that moment Mr. Butterbur was called 
away by a demand for more ale and his last remark remained 
unexplained. 

Frodo found that Strider was now looking at him, as if he 
had heard or guessed all that had been said. Presently, with 
a wave of his hand and a nod, he invited Frodo to come over 
and sit by him. As Frodo drew near he threw back his hood, 
showing a shaggy head of dark hair flecked with grey, and in 
a pale stern face a pair of keen grey eyes. 

‘I am called Strider,’ he said in a low voice. ‘I am very 
pleased to meet you, Master — Underhill, if old Butterbur got 
your name right.’ 

‘He did,’ said Frodo stiffly. He felt far from comfortable 
under the stare of those keen eyes. 

‘Well, Master Underhill,’ said Strider, ‘if I were you, I 
should stop your young friends from talking too much. Drink, 
fire, and chance-meeting are pleasant enough, but, well — this 
isn’t the Shire. There are queer folk about. Though I say it 
as shouldn’t, you may think,’ he added with a wry smile, 
seeing Frodo’s glance. ‘And there have been even stranger 
travellers through Bree lately,’ he went on, watching Frodo’s 
face. 

Frodo returned his gaze but said nothing; and Strider made 
no further sign. His attention seemed suddenly to be fixed on 
Pippin. To his alarm Frodo became aware that the ridiculous 


206 THE FELLOWSHIP OF THE RING 


young Took, encouraged by his success with the fat Mayor of 
Michel Delving, was now actually giving a comic account of 
Bilbo’s farewell party. He was already giving an imitation 
of the Speech, and was drawing near to the astonishing 
Disappearance. 

Frodo was annoyed. It was a harmless enough tale for most 
of the local hobbits, no doubt: just a funny story about those 
funny people away beyond the River; but some (old 
Butterbur, for instance) knew a thing or two, and had prob- 
ably heard rumours long ago about Bilbo’s vanishing. It 
would bring the name of Baggins to their minds, especially if 
there had been inquiries in Bree after that name. 

Frodo fidgeted, wondering what to do. Pippin was evi- 
dently much enjoying the attention he was getting, and had 
become quite forgetful of their danger. Frodo had a sudden 
fear that in his present mood he might even mention the 
Ring; and that might well be disastrous. 

“You had better do something quick!’ whispered Strider in 
his ear. 

Frodo jumped up and stood on a table, and began to talk. 
The attention of Pippin’s audience was disturbed. Some of 
the hobbits looked at Frodo and laughed and clapped, think- 
ing that Mr. Underhill had taken as much ale as was good 
for him. 

Frodo suddenly felt very foolish, and found himself (as 
was his habit when making a speech) fingering the things in 
his pocket. He felt the Ring on its chain, and quite unac- 
countably the desire came over him to slip it on and vanish 
out of the silly situation. It seemed to him, somehow, as if 
the suggestion came to him from outside, from someone or 
something in the room. He resisted the temptation firmly, 
and clasped the Ring in his hand, as if to keep a hold on it 
and prevent it from escaping or doing any mischief. At any 
rate it gave him no inspiration. He spoke ‘a few suitable 
words’, as they would have said in the Shire: We are all very 
much gratified by the kindness of your reception, and I venture 
to hope that my brief visit will help to renew the old ties of 


AT THE SIGN OF THE PRANCING PONY 207 


Friendship between the Shire and Bree; and then he hesitated 
and coughed. 

Everyone in the room was now looking at him. ‘A song!’ 
shouted one of the hobbits. ‘A song! A song!’ shouted all the 
others. ‘Come on now, master, sing us something that we 
haven’t heard before!’ 

For a moment Frodo stood gaping. Then in desperation 
he began a ridiculous song that Bilbo had been rather fond 
of (and indeed rather proud of, for he had made up the words 
himself). It was about an inn; and that is probably why it 
came into Frodo’s mind just then. Here it is in full. Only a 
few words of it are now, as a rule, remembered. 


There is an inn, a merry old inn 
beneath an old grey hill, 

And there they brew a beer so brown 

That the Man in the Moon himself came down 
one night to drink his fill. 


The ostler has a tipsy cat 
that plays a five-stringed fiddle; 
And up and down he runs his bow, 
Now squeaking high, now purring low, 
now sawing in the middle. 


The landlord keeps a little dog 

that 1s mighty fond of jokes; 
When there’s good cheer among the guests, 
He cocks an ear at all the jests 

and laughs until he chokes. 


They also keep a hornéd cow 
as proud as any queen; 
But music turns her head like ale, 
And makes her wave her tufted tail 
and dance upon the green. 


208 THE FELLOWSHIP OF THE RING 


And O! the rows of silver dishes 
and the store of silver spoons! 
For Sunday* there’s a special pair, 
And these they polish up with care 

on Saturday afternoons. 


The Man in the Moon was drinking deep, 
and the cat began to wail; 

A dish and a spoon on the table danced, 

The cow in the garden madly pranced, 
and the little dog chased his tail. 


The Man in the Moon took another mug, 
and then rolled beneath his chair; 
And there he dozed and dreamed of ale, 
Till in the sky the stars were pale, 
and dawn was in the air. 


Then the ostler said to his tipsy cat: 
‘The white horses of the Moon, 

They neigh and champ their silver bits; 

But their master’s been and drowned his wits, 
and the Sun’ll be rising soon!’ 


So the cat on his fiddle played hey-diddle-diddle, 
a jig that would wake the dead: 

He squeaked and sawed and quickened the tune, 

While the landlord shook the Man in the Moon: 
‘Tt’s after three! he said. 


They rolled the Man slowly up the hill 
and bundled him into the Moon, 

While his horses galloped up 1n rear, 

And the cow came capering like a deer, 
and a dish ran up with the spoon. 


* See note 2, III, p. 1462 


AT THE SIGN OF THE PRANCING PONY 209 


Now quicker the fiddle went deedle-dum-diddle; 
the dog began to roar, 
The cow and the horses stood on their heads; 
The guests all bounded from their beds 
and danced upon the floor. 


With a ping and a pong the fiddle-strings broke! 
the cow jumped over the Moon, 

And the little dog laughed to see such fun, 

And the Saturday dish went off at a run 
with the silver Sunday spoon. 


The round Moon rolled behind the hill 
as the Sun raised up her head. 

She* hardly believed her fiery eyes; 

For though it was day, to her surprise 
they all went back to bed! 


There was loud and long applause. Frodo had a good 
voice, and the song tickled their fancy. “Where’s old Barley?’ 
they cried. ‘He ought to hear this. Bob ought to learn his cat 
the fiddle, and then we’d have a dance.’ They called for more 
ale, and began to shout: ‘Let’s have it again, master! Come 
on now! Once more!’ 

They made Frodo have another drink, and then begin his 
song again, while many of them joined in; for the tune was 
well known, and they were quick at picking up words. It was 
now Frodo’s turn to feel pleased with himself. He capered 
about on the table; and when he came a second time to the 
cow jumped over the Moon, he leaped in the air. Much too 
vigorously; for he came down, bang, into a tray full of mugs, 
and slipped, and rolled off the table with a crash, clatter, 
and bump! The audience all opened their mouths wide for 
laughter, and stopped short in gaping silence; for the singer 


* Elves (and Hobbits) always refer to the Sun as She. 


210 THE FELLOWSHIP OF THE RING 


disappeared. He simply vanished, as if he had gone slap 
through the floor without leaving a hole! 

The local hobbits stared in amazement, and then sprang 
to their feet and shouted for Barliman. All the company drew 
away from Pippin and Sam, who found themselves left alone 
in a corner, and eyed darkly and doubtfully from a distance. 
It was plain that many people regarded them now as the 
companions of a travelling magician of unknown powers and 
purpose. But there was one swarthy Bree-lander, who stood 
looking at them with a knowing and half-mocking expression 
that made them feel very uncomfortable. Presently he slipped 
out of the door, followed by the squint-eyed southerner: the 
two had been whispering together a good deal during the 
evening. 

Frodo felt a fool. Not knowing what else to do, he crawled 
away under the tables to the dark corner by Strider, who sat 
unmoved, giving no sign of his thoughts. Frodo leaned back 
against the wall and took off the Ring. How it came to be on 
his finger he could not tell. He could only suppose that he 
had been handling it in his pocket while he sang, and that 
somehow it had slipped on when he stuck out his hand with 
a jerk to save his fall. For a moment he wondered if the Ring 
itself had not played him a trick; perhaps it had tried to reveal 
itself in response to some wish or command that was felt in 
the room. He did not like the looks of the men that had gone 
out. 

‘Well?’ said Strider, when he reappeared. “Why did you do 
that? Worse than anything your friends could have said! You 
have put your foot in it! Or should I say your finger?’ 

‘I don’t know what you mean,’ said Frodo, annoyed and 
alarmed. 

‘Oh yes, you do,’ answered Strider; ‘but we had better wait 
until the uproar has died down. Then, if you please, Mr. 
Baggins, I should like a quiet word with you.’ 

‘What about?’ asked Frodo, ignoring the sudden use of his 
proper name. 

‘A matter of some importance — to us both,’ answered 


AT THE SIGN OF THE PRANCING PONY 211 


Strider, looking Frodo in the eye. ‘You may hear something 
to your advantage.’ 

‘Very well,’ said Frodo, trying to appear unconcerned. ‘Tl 
talk to you later.’ 


Meanwhile an argument was going on by the fireplace. Mr. 
Butterbur had come trotting in, and he was now trying to 
listen to several conflicting accounts of the event at the same 
time. 

‘I saw him, Mr. Butterbur,’ said a hobbit; ‘or leastways I 
didn’t see him, if you take my meaning. He just vanished into 
thin air, in a manner of speaking.’ 

‘You don’t say, Mr. Mugwort!’ said the landlord, looking 
puzzled. 

‘Yes I do!’ replied Mugwort. ‘And I mean what I say, 
what’s more.’ 

“There’s some mistake somewhere,’ said Butterbur, shak- 
ing his head. “There was too much of that Mr. Underhill to 
go vanishing into thin air; or into thick air, as is more likely 
in this room.’ 

‘Well, where is he now?’ cried several voices. 

‘How should I know? He’s welcome to go where he will, 
so long as he pays in the morning. There’s Mr. Took, now: 
he’s not vanished.’ 

‘Well, I saw what I saw, and I saw what I didn’t,’ said 
Mugwort obstinately. 

‘And I say there’s some mistake,’ repeated Butterbur, 
picking up the tray and gathering up the broken crockery. 

‘Of course there’s a mistake!’ said Frodo. ‘I haven’t van- 
ished. Here I am! I’ve just been having a few words with 
Strider in the corner.’ 

He came forward into the firelight; but most of the com- 
pany backed away, even more perturbed than before. They 
were not in the least satisfied by his explanation that he had 
crawled away quickly under the tables after he had fallen. 
Most of the Hobbits and the Men of Bree went off then and 
there in a huff, having no fancy for further entertainment that 


212 THE FELLOWSHIP OF THE RING 


evening. One or two gave Frodo a black look and departed 
muttering among themselves. The Dwarves and the two or 
three strange Men that still remained got up and said good 
night to the landlord, but not to Frodo and his friends. Before 
long no one was left but Strider, who sat on, unnoticed, by 
the wall. 

Mr. Butterbur did not seem much put out. He reckoned, 
very probably, that his house would be full again on many 
future nights, until the present mystery had been thoroughly 
discussed. ‘Now what have you been doing, Mr. Underhill?’ 
he asked. ‘Frightening my customers and breaking up my 
crocks with your acrobatics!’ 

‘I am very sorry to have caused any trouble,’ said Frodo. 
‘It was quite unintentional, I assure you. A most unfortunate 
accident.’ 

‘All right, Mr. Underhill! But if you’re going to do any 
more tumbling, or conjuring, or whatever it was, you’d best 
warn folk beforehand — and warn me. We’re a bit suspicious 
round here of anything out of the way — uncanny, if you 
understand me; and we don’t take to it all of a sudden.’ 

‘I shan’t be doing anything of the sort again, Mr. Butterbur, 
I promise you. And now I think I'll be getting to bed. We 
shall be making an early start. Will you see that our ponies 
are ready by eight o’clock?’ 

‘Very good! But before you go, I should like a word with 
you in private, Mr. Underhill. Something has just come back 
to my mind that I ought to tell you. I hope that you’ll not 
take it amiss. When [I’ve seen to a thing or two, [ll come 
along to your room, if you’re willing.’ 

‘Certainly!’ said Frodo; but his heart sank. He wondered 
how many private talks he would have before he got to bed, 
and what they would reveal. Were these people all in league 
against him? He began to suspect even old Butterbur’s fat 
face of concealing dark designs. 


Chapter 10 


STRIDER 


Frodo, Pippin, and Sam made their way back to the parlour. 
There was no light. Merry was not there, and the fire had 
burned low. It was not until they had puffed up the embers 
into a blaze and thrown on a couple of faggots that they 
discovered Strider had come with them. There he was calmly 
sitting in a chair by the door! 

‘Hallo!’ said Pippin. “Who are you, and what do you want?’ 

‘I am called Strider,’ he answered; ‘and though he may 
have forgotten it, your friend promised to have a quiet talk 
with me.’ 

‘You said I might hear something to my advantage, I 
believe,’ said Frodo. ‘What have you to say?’ 

‘Several things,’ answered Strider. ‘But, of course, I have 
my price.’ 

‘What do you mean?’ asked Frodo sharply. 

‘Don’t be alarmed! I mean just this: I will tell you what 
I know, and give you some good advice — but I shall want a 
reward.’ 

‘And what will that be, pray?’ said Frodo. He suspected 
now that he had fallen in with a rascal, and he thought 
uncomfortably that he had brought only a little money with 
him. All of it would hardly satisfy a rogue, and he could not 
spare any of it. 

‘No more than you can afford,’ answered Strider with a 
slow smile, as if he guessed Frodo’s thoughts. ‘Just this: you 
must take me along with you, until I wish to leave you.’ 

‘Oh, indeed!’ replied Frodo, surprised, but not much 
relieved. ‘Even if I wanted another companion, I should not 
agree to any such thing, until I knew a good deal more about 
you, and your business.’ 


214 THE FELLOWSHIP OF THE RING 


‘Excellent!’ exclaimed Strider, crossing his legs and sitting 
back comfortably. “You seem to be coming to your senses 
again, and that is all to the good. You have been much too 
careless so far. Very well! I will tell you what I know, and 
leave the reward to you. You may be glad to grant it, when 
you have heard me.’ 

‘Go on then!’ said Frodo. ‘What do you know?’ 

“Too much; too many dark things,’ said Strider grimly. 
‘But as for your business > He got up and went to the 
door, opened it quickly and looked out. Then he shut it 
quietly and sat down again. ‘I have quick ears,’ he went on, 
lowering his voice, ‘and though I cannot disappear, I have 
hunted many wild and wary things and I can usually avoid 
being seen, if I wish. Now, I was behind the hedge this 
evening on the Road west of Bree, when four hobbits came 
out of the Downlands. I need not repeat all that they said to 
old Bombadil or to one another; but one thing interested me. 
Please remember, said one of them, that the name Baggins must 
not be mentioned. I am Mr. Underhill, if any name must be 
given. That interested me so much that I followed them here. 
I slipped over the gate just behind them. Maybe Mr. Baggins 
has an honest reason for leaving his name behind; but if so, 
I should advise him and his friends to be more careful.’ 

‘I don’t see what interest my name has for anyone in Bree,’ 
said Frodo angrily, ‘and I have still to learn why it interests 
you. Mr. Strider may have an honest reason for spying and 
eavesdropping; but if so, I should advise him to explain it.’ 

‘Well answered!’ said Strider laughing. ‘But the explanation 
is simple: I was looking for a Hobbit called Frodo Baggins. I 
wanted to find him quickly. I had learned that he was carrying 
out of the Shire, well, a secret that concerned me and my 
friends. 

‘Now, don’t mistake me!’ he cried, as Frodo rose from his 
seat, and Sam jumped up with a scowl. ‘I shall take more 
care of the secret than you do. And care is needed!’ He leaned 
forward and looked at them. ‘Watch every shadow!’ he said 
in a low voice. ‘Black horsemen have passed through Bree. 


STRIDER 215 


On Monday one came down the Greenway, they say; and 
another appeared later, coming up the Greenway from the 
south.’ 


There was a silence. At last Frodo spoke to Pippin and 
Sam: ‘I ought to have guessed it from the way the gatekeeper 
greeted us,’ he said. ‘And the landlord seems to have heard 
something. Why did he press us to join the company? And 
why on earth did we behave so foolishly: we ought to have 
stayed quiet in here.’ 

‘It would have been better,’ said Strider. ‘I would have 
stopped your going into the common-room, if I could; but 
the innkeeper would not let me in to see you, or take a 
message.’ 

‘Do you think he > began Frodo. 

‘No, I don’t think any harm of old Butterbur. Only he does 
not altogether like mysterious vagabonds of my sort.’ Frodo 
gave him a puzzled look. ‘Well, I have rather a rascally look, 
have I not?’ said Strider with a curl of his lip and a queer 
gleam in his eye. ‘But I hope we shall get to know one another 
better. When we do, I hope you will explain what happened 
at the end of your song. For that little prank——’ 

‘It was sheer accident!’ interrupted Frodo. 

‘I wonder,’ said Strider. ‘Accident, then. That accident has 
made your position dangerous.’ 

‘Hardly more than it was already,’ said Frodo. ‘I knew 
these horsemen were pursuing me; but now at any rate they 
seem to have missed me and to have gone away.’ 

“You must not count on that!’ said Strider sharply. “Chey 
will return. And more are coming. There are others. I know 
their number. I know these Riders.’ He paused, and his eyes 
were cold and hard. ‘And there are some folk in Bree who 
are not to be trusted,’ he went on. ‘Bill Ferny, for instance. 
He has an evil name in the Bree-land, and queer folk call at 
his house. You must have noticed him among the company: 
a swarthy sneering fellow. He was very close with one of the 
Southern strangers, and they slipped out together just after 


216 THE FELLOWSHIP OF THE RING 


your “‘accident’’. Not all of those Southerners mean well; and 
as for Ferny, he would sell anything to anybody; or make 
mischief for amusement.’ 

‘What will Ferny sell, and what has my accident got to do 
with him?’ said Frodo, still determined not to understand 
Strider’s hints. 

‘News of you, of course,’ answered Strider. ‘An account 
of your performance would be very interesting to certain 
people. After that they would hardly need to be told your real 
name. It seems to me only too likely that they will hear of it 
before this night is over. Is that enough? You can do as you 
like about my reward: take me as a guide or not. But I may 
say that I know all the lands between the Shire and the Misty 
Mountains, for I have wandered over them for many years. 
I am older than I look. I might prove useful. You will have 
to leave the open road after tonight; for the horsemen will 
watch it night and day. You may escape from Bree, and be 
allowed to go forward while the Sun is up; but you won’t go 
far. They will come on you in the wild, in some dark place 
where there is no help. Do you wish them to find you? They 
are terrible!’ 

The hobbits looked at him, and saw with surprise that his 
face was drawn as if with pain, and his hands clenched the 
arms of his chair. The room was very quiet and still, and the 
light seemed to have grown dim. For a while he sat with 
unseeing eyes as if walking in distant memory or listening to 
sounds in the Night far away. 

“There!” he cried after a moment, drawing his hand across 
his brow. ‘Perhaps I know more about these pursuers than 
you do. You fear them, but you do not fear them enough, 
yet. Tomorrow you will have to escape, if you can. Strider 
can take you by paths that are seldom trodden. Will you have 
him?’ 

There was a heavy silence. Frodo made no answer; his 
mind was confused with doubt and fear. Sam frowned, and 
looked at his master; and at last he broke out: 

‘With your leave, Mr. Frodo, I’d say no! This Strider here, 


STRIDER 217 


he warns and he says take care; and I say yes to that, and let’s 
begin with him. He comes out of the Wild, and I never heard 
no good of such folk. He knows something, that’s plain, and 
more than I like; but it’s no reason why we should let him 
go leading us out into some dark place far from help, as he 
puts it.’ 

Pippin fidgeted and looked uncomfortable. Strider did not 
reply to Sam, but turned his keen eyes on Frodo. Frodo 
caught his glance and looked away. ‘No,’ he said slowly. ‘I 
don’t agree. I think, I think you are not really as you choose 
to look. You began to talk to me like the Bree-folk, but your 
voice has changed. Still Sam seems right in this: I don’t see 
why you should warn us to take care, and yet ask us to take 
you on trust. Why the disguise? Who are you? What do you 
really know about — about my business; and how do you 
know it?’ 

“The lesson in caution has been well learned,’ said Strider 
with a grim smile. ‘But caution is one thing and wavering is 
another. You will never get to Rivendell now on your own, 
and to trust me is your only chance. You must make up your 
mind. I will answer some of your questions, if that will help 
you to do so. But why should you believe my story, if you 
do not trust me already? Still here it is : 


At that moment there came a knock at the door. Mr. 
Butterbur had arrived with candles, and behind him was Nob 
with cans of hot water. Strider withdrew into a dark corner. 

‘lve come to bid you good night,’ said the landlord, putting 
the candles on the table. “Nob! Take the water to the rooms!’ 
He came in and shut the door. 

‘Tt’s like this,’ he began, hesitating and looking troubled. ‘If 
Ive done any harm, I’m sorry indeed. But one thing drives 
out another, as you'll admit; and I’m a busy man. But first one 
thing and then another this week have jogged my memory, as 
the saying goes; and not too late I hope. You see, I was asked 
to look out for hobbits of the Shire, and for one by the name 
of Baggins in particular.’ 


218 THE FELLOWSHIP OF THE RING 


‘And what has that got to do with me?’ asked Frodo. 

‘Ah! you know best,’ said the landlord, knowingly. ‘I won’t 
give you away; but I was told that this Baggins would be 
going by the name of Underhill, and I was given a description 
that fits you well enough, if I may say so.’ 

‘Indeed! Let’s have it then!’ said Frodo, unwisely inter- 
rupting. 

‘A stout little fellow with red cheeks, said Mr. Butterbur 
solemnly. Pippin chuckled, but Sam looked indignant. ‘That 
won’t help you much; it goes for most hobbits, Barley, he says to 
me,’ continued Mr. Butterbur with a glance at Pippin. ‘But 
this one ts taller than some and fairer than most, and he has a 
cleft in his chin: perky chap with a bright eye. Begging your 
pardon, but he said it, not me.’ 

‘He said it? And who was he?’ asked Frodo eagerly. 

‘Ah! That was Gandalf, if you know who I mean. A wizard 
they say he is, but he’s a good friend of mine, whether or no. 
But now I don’t know what he’ll have to say to me, if I see 
him again: turn all my ale sour or me into a block of wood, I 
shouldn’t wonder. He’s a bit hasty. Still what’s done can’t be 
undone.’ 

‘Well, what have you done?’ said Frodo, getting impatient 
with the slow unravelling of Butterbur’s thoughts. 

‘Where was I?’ said the landlord, pausing and snapping his 
fingers. ‘Ah, yes! Old Gandalf. Three months back he walked 
right into my room without a knock. Barley, he says, I’m off 
in the morning. Will you do something for me? You've only to 
name it, | said. ’m in a hurry, said he, and I’ve no time myself, 
but I want a message took to the Shire. Have you anyone you 
can send, and trust to go? I can find someone, I said, tomorrow, 
maybe, or the day after. Make it tomorrow, he says, and then 
he gave me a letter. 

‘It’s addressed plain enough,’ said Mr. Butterbur, pro- 
ducing a letter from his pocket, and reading out the 
address slowly and proudly (he valued his reputation as a 
lettered man): 


STRIDER 219 


Mr. FRODO BAGGINS, BAG END, HOBBITON 
in the SHIRE. 


‘A letter for me from Gandalf! cried Frodo. 

‘Ah!’ said Mr. Butterbur. “Then your right name is 
Baggins?’ 

‘It is,’ said Frodo, ‘and you had better give me that letter 
at once, and explain why you never sent it. That’s what you 
came to tell me, I suppose, though you’ve taken a long time 
to come to the point.’ 

Poor Mr. Butterbur looked troubled. ‘Yow’re right, master,’ 
he said, ‘and I beg your pardon. And I’m mortal afraid of 
what Gandalf will say, if harm comes of it. But I didn’t keep 
it back a-purpose. I put it by safe. Then I couldn’t find 
nobody willing to go to the Shire next day, nor the day after, 
and none of my own folk were to spare; and then one thing 
after another drove it out of my mind. I’m a busy man. Ill 
do what I can to set matters right, and if there’s any help I 
can give, you’ve only to name it. 

‘Leaving the letter aside, I promised Gandalf no less. 
Barley, he says to me, this friend of mine from the Shire, he may 
be coming out this way before long, him and another. He’ll be 
calling himself Underhill. Mind that! But you need ask no 
questions. And if I’m not with him, he may be in trouble, and he 
may need help. Do whatever vou can for him, and I'll be grateful, 
he says. And here you are, and trouble is not far off, 
seemingly.’ 

‘What do you mean?’ asked Frodo. 

“These black men,’ said the landlord lowering his voice. 
“They’re looking for Baggins, and if they mean well, then ’m 
a hobbit. It was on Monday, and all the dogs were yammering 
and the geese screaming. Uncanny, I called it. Nob, he came 
and told me that two black men were at the door asking for 
a hobbit called Baggins. Nob’s hair was all stood on end. I 
bid the black fellows be off, and slammed the door on them; 
but they’ve been asking the same question all the way to 
Archet, I hear. And that Ranger, Strider, he’s been asking 


220 THE FELLOWSHIP OF THE RING 


questions, too. Tried to get in here to see you, before you’d 
had bite or sup, he did.’ 

‘He did!’ said Strider suddenly, coming forward into the 
light. ‘And much trouble would have been saved, if you had 
let him in, Barliman.’ 

The landlord jumped with surprise. ‘You!’ he cried. 
“Youre always popping up. What do you want now?’ 

“He’s here with my leave,’ said Frodo. ‘He came to offer 
me his help.’ 

‘Well, you know your own business, maybe,’ said Mr. 
Butterbur, looking suspiciously at Strider. ‘But if I was in 
your plight, I wouldn’t take up with a Ranger.’ 

“Then who would you take up with?’ asked Strider. ‘A fat 
innkeeper who only remembers his own name because people 
shout it at him all day? They cannot stay in The Pony for 
ever, and they cannot go home. They have a long road before 
them. Will you go with them and keep the black men off?’ 

‘Me? Leave Bree! I wouldn’t do that for any money,’ said 
Mr. Butterbur, looking really scared. ‘But why can’t you stay 
here quiet for a bit, Mr. Underhill? What are all these queer 
goings on? What are these black men after, and where do 
they come from, I’d like to know?’ 

‘Tm sorry I can’t explain it all,’ answered Frodo. ‘I am tired 
and very worried, and it’s a long tale. But if you mean to help 
me, I ought to warn you that you will be in danger as long as 
I am in your house. These Black Riders: I am not sure, but 
I think, I fear they come from: : 

“They come from Mordor,’ said Strider in a low voice. 
‘From Mordor, Barliman, if that means anything to you.’ 

‘Save us!’ cried Mr. Butterbur turning pale; the name evi- 
dently was known to him. “That is the worst news that has 
come to Bree in my time.’ 

‘Tt is, said Frodo. ‘Are you still willing to help me?’ 

‘Tam,’ said Mr. Butterbur. ‘More than ever. Though I 
don’t know what the likes of me can do against, against ——’ 
he faltered. 

‘Against the Shadow in the East,’ said Strider quietly. “Not 


STRIDER 221 


much, Barliman, but every little helps. You can let Mr. 
Underhill stay here tonight, as Mr. Underhill; and you can 
forget the name of Baggins, till he is far away.’ 

‘Tl do that,’ said Butterbur. “But they'll find out he’s here 
without help from me, I’m afraid. It’s a pity Mr. Baggins 
drew attention to himself this evening, to say no more. The 
story of that Mr. Bilbo’s going off has been heard before 
tonight in Bree. Even our Nob has been doing some guessing 
in his slow pate; and there are others in Bree quicker in the 
uptake than he is.’ 

‘Well, we can only hope the Riders won’t come back yet,’ 
said Frodo. 

‘I hope not, indeed,’ said Butterbur. ‘But spooks or no 
spooks, they won’t get in The Pony so easy. Don’t you worry 
till the morning. Nob’ll say no word. No black man shall pass 
my doors, while I can stand on my legs. Me and my folk’ll keep 
watch tonight; but you had best get some sleep, if you can.’ 

‘In any case we must be called at dawn,’ said Frodo. ‘We 
must get off as early as possible. Breakfast at six-thirty, please.’ 

‘Right! Pll see to the orders,’ said the landlord. ‘Good night, 
Mr. Baggins — Underhill, I should say! Good night — now, 
bless me! Where’s your Mr. Brandybuck?’ 

‘T don’t know,’ said Frodo with sudden anxiety. They had 
forgotten all about Merry, and it was getting late. ‘I am afraid 
he is out. He said something about going for a breath of air.’ 

‘Well, you do want looking after and no mistake: your party 
might be on a holiday!’ said Butterbur. ‘I must go and bar 
the doors quick, but I'll see your friend is let in when he 
comes. I’d better send Nob to look for him. Good night to 
you all!’ At last Mr. Butterbur went out, with another doubt- 
ful look at Strider and a shake of his head. His footsteps 
retreated down the passage. 


‘Well?’ said Strider. ‘When are you going to open that letter?’ 
Frodo looked carefully at the seal before he broke it. It seemed 
certainly to be Gandalf’s. Inside, written in the wizard’s 
strong but graceful script, was the following message: 


222 THE FELLOWSHIP OF THE RING 


THE PRANCING PONY, BREE. Midyear’s Day, Shire Year, 
1478. 


Dear Frodo, 

Bad news has reached me here. I must go off at once. You had 
better leave Bag End soon, and get out of the Shire before the end 
of Fuly at latest. I will return as soon as I can; and I will follow 
you, if I find that you are gone. Leave a message for me here, tf 
you pass through Bree. You can trust the landlord (Butterbur). 
You may meet a friend of mine on the Road: a Man, lean, dark, 
tall, by some called Strider. He knows our business and will help 
you. Make for Rivendell. There I hope we may meet again. If I 
do not come, Elrond will advise you. 

Yours in haste 


GANDALF. P 


PS. Do NOT use It again, not for any reason whatever! Do 
not travel by night! P 

PPS. Make sure that it is the real Strider. There are many 
strange men on the roads. His true name is Aragorn. 


All that is gold does not glitter, 
Not all those who wander are lost; 
The old that is strong does not wither, 
Deep roots are not reached by the frost. 
From the ashes a fire shall be woken, 
A light from the shadows shall spring; 
Renewed shall be blade that was broken, 
The crownless again shall be king. 


PPPS. I hope Butterbur sends this promptly. A worthy 
man, but his memory is like a lumber- 
room: thing wanted always buried. 

If he forgets, I shall roast him. 
Fare Well! 


STRIDER 223 


Frodo read the letter to himself, and then passed it to 
Pippin and Sam. ‘Really old Butterbur has made a mess of 
things!’ he said. ‘He deserves roasting. If I had got this at 
once, we might all have been safe in Rivendell by now. But 
what can have happened to Gandalf? He writes as if he was 
going into great danger.’ 

‘He has been doing that for many years,’ said Strider. 

Frodo turned and looked at him thoughtfully, wondering 
about Gandalf’s second postscript. “Why didn’t you tell me 
that you were Gandalf’s friend at once?’ he asked. ‘It would 
have saved time.’ 

‘Would it? Would any of you have believed me till now?’ 
said Strider. ‘I knew nothing of this letter. For all I knew I 
had to persuade you to trust me without proofs, if I was to 
help you. In any case, I did not intend to tell you all about 
myself at once. I had to study you first, and make sure 
of you. The Enemy has set traps for me before now. As 
soon as I had made up my mind, I was ready to tell you 
whatever you asked. But I must admit,’ he added with a 
queer laugh, ‘that I hoped you would take to me for my 
own sake. A hunted man sometimes wearies of distrust and 
longs for friendship. But there, I believe my looks are against 
me.’ 

“They are — at first sight at any rate,’ laughed Pippin with 
sudden relief after reading Gandalf’s letter. ‘But handsome 
is as handsome does, as we say in the Shire; and I daresay 
we shall all look much the same after lying for days in hedges 
and ditches.’ 

‘It would take more than a few days, or weeks, or years, of 
wandering in the Wild to make you look like Strider,’ he 
answered. ‘And you would die first, unless you are made of 
sterner stuff than you look to be.’ 

Pippin subsided; but Sam was not daunted, and he still 
eyed Strider dubiously. ‘How do we know you are the Strider 
that Gandalf speaks about?’ he demanded. ‘You never men- 
tioned Gandalf, till this letter came out. You might be a 
play-acting spy, for all I can see, trying to get us to go with 


224 THE FELLOWSHIP OF THE RING 


you. You might have done in the real Strider and took his 
clothes. What have you to say to that?’ 

“That you are a stout fellow,’ answered Strider; ‘but I am 
afraid my only answer to you, Sam Gamgee, is this. If I had 
killed the real Strider, I could kill you. And I should have 
killed you already without so much talk. If I was after the 
Ring, I could have it - Now!’ 

He stood up, and seemed suddenly to grow taller. In his 
eyes gleamed a light, keen and commanding. Throwing back 
his cloak, he laid his hand on the hilt of a sword that had 
hung concealed by his side. They did not dare to move. Sam 
sat wide-mouthed staring at him dumbly. 

‘But I am the real Strider, fortunately,’ he said, looking 
down at them with his face softened by a sudden smile. ‘I am 
Aragorn son of Arathorn; and if by life or death I can save 
you, I will.’ 


There was a long silence. At last Frodo spoke with hesita- 
tion. ‘I believed that you were a friend before the letter came,’ 
he said, ‘or at least I wished to. You have frightened me 
several times tonight, but never in the way that servants of 
the Enemy would, or so I imagine. I think one of his spies 
would — well, seem fairer and feel fouler, if you understand.’ 

‘T see,’ laughed Strider. ‘I look foul and feel fair. Is that it? 
All that is gold does not glitter, not all those who wander are lost.’ 

‘Did the verses apply to you then?’ asked Frodo. ‘I could 
not make out what they were about. But how did you know 
that they were in Gandalf’s letter, if you have never seen it?’ 

‘T did not know,’ he answered. ‘But I am Aragorn, and 
those verses go with that name.’ He drew out his sword, and 
they saw that the blade was indeed broken a foot below the 
hilt. ‘Not much use is it, Sam?’ said Strider. “But the time is 
near when it shall be forged anew.’ 

Sam said nothing. 

‘Well,’ said Strider, ‘with Sam’s permission we will call that 
settled. Strider shall be your guide. And now I think it is time 
you went to bed and took what rest you can. We shall have 


STRIDER 225 


a rough road tomorrow. Even if we are allowed to leave Bree 
unhindered, we can hardly hope now to leave it unnoticed. 
But I shall try to get lost as soon as possible. I know one or 
two ways out of Bree-land other than the main road. If once 
we shake off the pursuit, I shall make for Weathertop.’ 

‘Weathertop?’ said Sam. ‘What’s that?’ 

‘It is a hill, just to the north of the Road, about half way 
from here to Rivendell. It commands a wide view all round; 
and there we shall have a chance to look about us. Gandalf 
will make for that point, if he follows us. After Weathertop 
our journey will become more difficult, and we shall have to 
choose between various dangers.’ 

‘When did you last see Gandalf?’ asked Frodo. ‘Do you 
know where he is, or what he is doing?’ 

Strider looked grave. ‘I do not know,’ he said. ‘I came west 
with him in the spring. I have often kept watch on the borders 
of the Shire in the last few years, when he was busy elsewhere. 
He seldom left it unguarded. We last met on the first of May: 
at Sarn Ford down the Brandywine. He told me that his 
business with you had gone well, and that you would be 
starting for Rivendell in the last week of September. As I 
knew he was at your side, I went away on a journey of my 
own. And that has proved ill; for plainly some news reached 
him, and I was not at hand to help. 

‘I am troubled, for the first time since I have known him. 
We should have had messages, even if he could not come 
himself. When I returned, many days ago, I heard the ill 
news. The tidings had gone far and wide that Gandalf 
was missing and the horsemen had been seen. It was the 
Elven-folk of Gildor that told me this; and later they told me 
that you had left your home; but there was no news of your 
leaving Buckland. I have been watching the East Road 
anxiously.’ 

‘Do you think the Black Riders have anything to do with 
it — with Gandalf’s absence, I mean?’ asked Frodo. 

‘IT do not know of anything else that could have hindered 
him, except the Enemy himself,’ said Strider. “But do not 


226 THE FELLOWSHIP OF THE RING 


give up hope! Gandalf is greater than you Shire-folk know — 
as a rule you can only see his jokes and toys. But this business 
of ours will be his greatest task.’ 

Pippin yawned. ‘I am sorry,’ he said, ‘but I am dead tired. 
In spite of all the danger and worry I must go to bed, or 
sleep where I sit. Where is that silly fellow, Merry? It would 
be the last straw, if we had to go out in the dark to look for 
him.’ 


At that moment they heard a door slam; then feet came 
running along the passage. Merry came in with a rush fol- 
lowed by Nob. He shut the door hastily, and leaned against 
it. He was out of breath. They stared at him in alarm for a 
moment before he gasped: ‘I have seen them, Frodo! I have 
seen them! Black Riders!’ 

‘Black Riders!’ cried Frodo. ‘Where?’ 

‘Here. In the village. I stayed indoors for an hour. Then as 
you did not come back, I went out for a stroll. I had come 
back again and was standing just outside the light of the 
lamp looking at the stars. Suddenly I shivered and felt that 
something horrible was creeping near: there was a sort of 
deeper shade among the shadows across the road, just beyond 
the edge of the lamplight. It slid away at once into the dark 
without a sound. There was no horse.’ 

‘Which way did it go?’ asked Strider, suddenly and sharply. 

Merry started, noticing the stranger for the first time. ‘Go 
on! said Frodo. “This is a friend of Gandalf’s. I will explain 
later.’ 

‘It seemed to make off up the Road, eastward,’ continued 
Merry. ‘I tried to follow. Of course, it vanished almost at 
once; but I went round the corner and on as far as the last 
house on the Road.’ 

Strider looked at Merry with wonder. ‘You have a stout 
heart,’ he said; ‘but it was foolish.’ 

‘I don’t know,’ said Merry. “Neither brave nor silly, I think. 
I could hardly help myself. I seemed to be drawn somehow. 
Anyway, I went, and suddenly I heard voices by the hedge. 


STRIDER 227 


One was muttering; and the other was whispering, or hissing. 
I couldn’t hear a word that was said. I did not creep any 
closer, because I began to tremble all over. Then I felt terri- 
fied, and I turned back, and was just going to bolt home, 
when something came behind me and 1... I fell over.’ 

‘I found him, sir,’ put in Nob. ‘Mr. Butterbur sent me out 
with a lantern. I went down to West-gate, and then back up 
towards South-gate. Just nigh Bill Ferny’s house I thought I 
could see something in the Road. I couldn’t swear to it, but 
it looked to me as if two men was stooping over something, 
lifting it. I gave a shout, but when I got up to the spot there 
was no signs of them, and only Mr. Brandybuck lying by the 
roadside. He seemed to be asleep. “I thought I had fallen into 
deep water,”’ he says to me, when I shook him. Very queer 
he was, and as soon as I had roused him, he got up and ran 
back here like a hare.’ 

‘IT am afraid that’s true,’ said Merry, ‘though I don’t know 
what I said. I had an ugly dream, which I can’t remember. 
I went to pieces. I don’t know what came over me.’ 

‘I do,’ said Strider. “The Black Breath. The Riders must 
have left their horses outside, and passed back through the 
South-gate in secret. They will know all the news now, for 
they have visited Bill Ferny; and probably that Southerner 
was a spy as well. Something may happen in the night, before 
we leave Bree.’ 

‘What will happen?’ said Merry. ‘Will they attack the inn?’ 

‘No, I think not,’ said Strider. “They are not all here yet. 
And in any case that is not their way. In dark and loneliness 
they are strongest; they will not openly attack a house where 
there are lights and many people — not until they are des- 
perate, not while all the long leagues of Eriador still lie before 
us. But their power is in terror, and already some in Bree are 
in their clutch. They will drive these wretches to some evil 
work: Ferny, and some of the strangers, and, maybe, the 
gatekeeper too. They had words with Harry at West-gate on 
Monday. I was watching them. He was white and shaking 
when they left him.’ 


228 THE FELLOWSHIP OF THE RING 


‘We seem to have enemies all round,’ said Frodo. ‘What 
are we to do?’ 

‘Stay here, and do not go to your rooms! They are sure to 
have found out which those are. The hobbit-rooms have 
windows looking north and close to the ground. We will all 
remain together and bar this window and the door. But first 
Nob and I will fetch your luggage.’ 

While Strider was gone, Frodo gave Merry a rapid account 
of all that had happened since supper. Merry was still read- 
ing and pondering Gandalf’s letter when Strider and Nob 
returned. 

‘Well Masters,’ said Nob, ‘I’ve ruffled up the clothes and 
put in a bolster down the middle of each bed. And I made a 
nice imitation of your head with a brown woollen mat, Mr. 
Bag — Underhill, sir,’ he added with a grin. 

Pippin laughed. ‘Very life-like!’ he said. ‘But what will 
happen when they have penetrated the disguise?’ 

‘We shall see,’ said Strider. ‘Let us hope to hold the fort 
till morning.’ 

‘Good night to you,’ said Nob, and went off to take his 
part in the watch on the doors. 

Their bags and gear they piled on the parlour-floor. They 
pushed a low chair against the door and shut the window. 
Peering out, Frodo saw that the night was still clear. The 
Sickle* was swinging bright above the shoulders of Bree-hill. 
He then closed and barred the heavy inside shutters and drew 
the curtains together. Strider built up the fire and blew out 
all the candles. 

The hobbits lay down on their blankets with their feet 
towards the hearth; but Strider settled himself in the chair 
against the door. They talked for a little, for Merry still had 
several questions to ask. 

‘Jumped over the Moon!’ chuckled Merry as he rolled him- 
self in his blanket. ‘Very ridiculous of you, Frodo! But I wish 


* The Hobbits’ name for the Plough or Great Bear. 


STRIDER 229 


I had been there to see. The worthies of Bree will be dis- 
cussing it a hundred years hence.’ 

‘T hope so,’ said Strider. Then they all fell silent, and one 
by one the hobbits dropped off to sleep. 


Chapter 11 


A KNIFE IN THE DARK 


As they prepared for sleep in the inn at Bree, darkness lay on 
Buckland; a mist strayed in the dells and along the river-bank. 
The house at Crickhollow stood silent. Fatty Bolger opened 
the door cautiously and peered out. A feeling of fear had 
been growing on him all day, and he was unable to rest or go 
to bed: there was a brooding threat in the breathless night-air. 
As he stared out into the gloom, a black shadow moved under 
the trees; the gate seemed to open of its own accord and close 
again without a sound. Terror seized him. He shrank back, 
and for a moment he stood trembling in the hall. Then he 
shut and locked the door. 

The night deepened. There came the soft sound of horses 
led with stealth along the lane. Outside the gate they stopped, 
and three black figures entered, like shades of night creeping 
across the ground. One went to the door, one to the corner 
of the house on either side; and there they stood, as still as 
the shadows of stones, while night went slowly on. The house 
and the quiet trees seemed to be waiting breathlessly. 

There was a faint stir in the leaves, and a cock crowed far 
away. The cold hour before dawn was passing. The figure 
by the door moved. In the dark without moon or stars a 
drawn blade gleamed, as if a chill light had been unsheathed. 
There was a blow, soft but heavy, and the door shuddered. 

‘Open, in the name of Mordor!’ said a voice thin and 
menacing. 

At a second blow the door yielded and fell back, with 
timbers burst and lock broken. The black figures passed 
swiftly in. 

At that moment, among the trees nearby, a horn rang out. 
It rent the night like fire on a hill-top. 


A KNIFE IN THE DARK 231 


AWAKE! FEAR! FIRE! FOES! AWAKE! 


Fatty Bolger had not been idle. As soon as he saw the dark 
shapes creep from the garden, he knew that he must run for 
it, or perish. And run he did, out of the back door, through 
the garden, and over the fields. When he reached the nearest 
house, more than a mile away, he collapsed on the doorstep. 
‘No, no, no!’ he was crying. ‘No, not me! I haven’t got it!’ It 
was some time before anyone could make out what he was 
babbling about. At last they got the idea that enemies were 
in Buckland, some strange invasion from the Old Forest. And 
then they lost no more time. 


FEAR! FIRE! FOES! 


The Brandybucks were blowing the Horn-call of Buckland, 
that had not been sounded for a hundred years, not since the 
white wolves came in the Fell Winter, when the Brandywine 
was frozen over. 


AWAKE! AWAKE! 


Far away answering horns were heard. The alarm was 
spreading. 

The black figures fled from the house. One of them let fall 
a hobbit-cloak on the step, as he ran. In the lane the noise of 
hoofs broke out, and gathering to a gallop, went hammering 
away into the darkness. All about Crickhollow there was the 
sound of horns blowing, and voices crying and feet running. 
But the Black Riders rode like a gale to the North-gate. Let 
the little people blow! Sauron would deal with them later. 
Meanwhile they had another errand: they knew now that the 
house was empty and the Ring had gone. They rode down 
the guards at the gate and vanished from the Shire. 


ok * ok 


232 THE FELLOWSHIP OF THE RING 


In the early night Frodo woke from deep sleep, suddenly, 
as if some sound or presence had disturbed him. He saw that 
Strider was sitting alert in his chair: his eyes gleamed in the 
light of the fire, which had been tended and was burning 
brightly; but he made no sign or movement. 

Frodo soon went to sleep again; but his dreams were again 
troubled with the noise of wind and of galloping hoofs. The 
wind seemed to be curling round the house and shaking it; 
and far off he heard a horn blowing wildly. He opened his 
eyes, and heard a cock crowing lustily in the inn-yard. Strider 
had drawn the curtains and pushed back the shutters with a 
clang. The first grey light of day was in the room, and a cold 
air was coming through the open window. 

As soon as Strider had roused them all, he led the way to 
their bedrooms. When they saw them they were glad that 
they had taken his advice: the windows had been forced open 
and were swinging, and the curtains were flapping; the beds 
were tossed about, and the bolsters slashed and flung upon 
the floor; the brown mat was torn to pieces. 

Strider immediately went to fetch the landlord. Poor Mr. 
Butterbur looked sleepy and frightened. He had hardly closed 
his eyes all night (so he said), but he had never heard a sound. 

‘Never has such a thing happened in my time!’ he cried, 
raising his hands in horror. ‘Guests unable to sleep in their 
beds, and good bolsters ruined and all! What are we coming 
to?’ 

‘Dark times,’ said Strider. ‘But for the present you may be 
left in peace, when you have got rid of us. We will leave at 
once. Never mind about breakfast: a drink and a bite standing 
will have to do. We shall be packed in a few minutes.’ 

Mr. Butterbur hurried off to see that their ponies were got 
ready, and to fetch them a ‘bite’. But very soon he came back 
in dismay. The ponies had vanished! The stable-doors had 
all been opened in the night, and they were gone: not only 
Merry’s ponies, but every other horse and beast in the place. 

Frodo was crushed by the news. How could they hope to 
reach Rivendell on foot, pursued by mounted enemies? They 


A KNIFE IN THE DARK 233 


might as well set out for the Moon. Strider sat silent for a 
while, looking at the hobbits, as if he was weighing up their 
strength and courage. 

‘Ponies would not help us to escape horsemen,’ he said at 
last, thoughtfully, as if he guessed what Frodo had in mind. 
‘We should not go much slower on foot, not on the roads 
that I mean to take. I was going to walk in any case. It is the 
food and stores that trouble me. We cannot count on getting 
anything to eat between here and Rivendell, except what we 
take with us; and we ought to take plenty to spare; for we 
may be delayed, or forced to go round-about, far out of the 
direct way. How much are you prepared to carry on your 
backs?’ 

‘As much as we must,’ said Pippin with a sinking heart, 
but trying to show that he was tougher than he looked (or 
felt). 

‘I can carry enough for two,’ said Sam defiantly. 

‘Can’t anything be done, Mr. Butterbur?’ asked Frodo. 
‘Can’t we get a couple of ponies in the village, or even one 
just for the baggage? I don’t suppose we could hire them, 
but we might be able to buy them,’ he added, doubtfully, 
wondering if he could afford it. 

‘T doubt it,’ said the landlord unhappily. “The two or three 
riding-ponies that there were in Bree were stabled in my yard, 
and they’re gone. As for other animals, horses or ponies for 
draught or what not, there are very few of them in Bree, and 
they won’t be for sale. But P’ll do what I can. Pll rout out Bob 
and send him round as soon as may be.’ 

‘Yes,’ said Strider reluctantly, ‘you had better do that. Iam 
afraid we shall have to try to get one pony at least. But so 
ends all hope of starting early, and slipping away quietly! We 
might as well have blown a horn to announce our departure. 
That was part of their plan, no doubt.’ 

“There is one crumb of comfort,’ said Merry, ‘and more 
than a crumb, I hope: we can have breakfast while we wait — 
and sit down to it. Let’s get hold of Nob!’ 

ok k ok 


234 THE FELLOWSHIP OF THE RING 


In the end there was more than three hours’ delay. Bob 
came back with the report that no horse or pony was to be 
got for love or money in the neighbourhood — except one: 
Bill Ferny had one that he might possibly sell. ‘A poor old 
half-starved creature it is,’ said Bob; ‘but he won’t part with 
it for less than thrice its worth, seeing how you’re placed, not 
if I knows Bill Ferny.’ 

‘Bill Ferny?’ said Frodo. ‘Isn’t there some trick? Wouldn’t 
the beast bolt back to him with all our stuff, or help in tracking 
us, or something?’ 

‘I wonder,’ said Strider. ‘But I cannot imagine any animal 
running home to him, once it got away. I fancy this is only 
an afterthought of kind Master Ferny’s: just a way of increas- 
ing his profits from the affair. The chief danger is that the 
poor beast is probably at death’s door. But there does not 
seem any choice. What does he want for it?’ 

Bill Ferny’s price was twelve silver pennies; and that was 
indeed at least three times the pony’s value in those parts. It 
proved to be a bony, underfed, and dispirited animal; but 
it did not look like dying just yet. Mr. Butterbur paid for it 
himself, and offered Merry another eighteen pence as some 
compensation for the lost animals. He was an honest man, 
and well-off as things were reckoned in Bree; but thirty silver 
pennies was a sore blow to him, and being cheated by Bill 
Ferny made it harder to bear. 

As a matter of fact he came out on the right side in the 
end. It turned out later that only one horse had been actually 
stolen. The others had been driven off, or had bolted in 
terror, and were found wandering in different corners of 
the Bree-land. Merry’s ponies had escaped altogether, and 
eventually (having a good deal of sense) they made their way 
to the Downs in search of Fatty Lumpkin. So they came 
under the care of Tom Bombadil for a while, and were well- 
off. But when news of the events at Bree came to Tom’s ears, 
he sent them to Mr. Butterbur, who thus got five good beasts 
at a very fair price. They had to work harder in Bree, but 
Bob treated them well; so on the whole they were lucky: they 


A KNIFE IN THE DARK 235 


missed a dark and dangerous journey. But they never came 
to Rivendell. 

However, in the meanwhile for all Mr. Butterbur knew his 
money was gone for good, or for bad. And he had other 
troubles. For there was a great commotion as soon as the 
remaining guests were astir and heard news of the raid on 
the inn. The southern travellers had lost several horses and 
blamed the innkeeper loudly, until it became known that one 
of their own number had also disappeared in the night, none 
other than Bill Ferny’s squint-eyed companion. Suspicion fell 
on him at once. 

‘If you pick up with a horse-thief, and bring him to my 
house,’ said Butterbur angrily, ‘you ought to pay for all the 
damage yourselves and not come shouting at me. Go and ask 
Ferny where your handsome friend is!’ But it appeared that 
he was nobody’s friend, and nobody could recollect when he 
had joined their party. 


After their breakfast the hobbits had to re-pack, and get 
together further supplies for the longer journey they were 
now expecting. It was close on ten o’clock before they at last 
got off. By that time the whole of Bree was buzzing with 
excitement. Frodo’s vanishing trick; the appearance of the 
black horsemen; the robbing of the stables; and not least 
the news that Strider the Ranger had joined the mysterious 
hobbits, made such a tale as would last for many uneventful 
years. Most of the inhabitants of Bree and Staddle, and many 
even from Combe and Archet, were crowded in the road to 
see the travellers start. The other guests in the inn were at 
the doors or hanging out of the windows. 

Strider had changed his mind, and had decided to leave 
Bree by the main road. Any attempt to set off across country 
at once would only make matters worse: half the inhabitants 
would follow them, to see what they were up to, and to 
prevent them from trespassing. 

They said farewell to Nob and Bob, and took leave of Mr. 
Butterbur with many thanks. ‘I hope we shall meet again 


236 THE FELLOWSHIP OF THE RING 


some day, when things are merry once more,’ said Frodo. ‘I 
should like nothing better than to stay in your house in peace 
for a while.’ 

They tramped off, anxious and downhearted, under the 
eyes of the crowd. Not all the faces were friendly, nor all the 
words that were shouted. But Strider seemed to be held in 
awe by most of the Bree-landers, and those that he stared at 
shut their mouths and drew away. He walked in front with 
Frodo; next came Merry and Pippin; and last came Sam 
leading the pony, which was laden with as much of their 
baggage as they had the heart to give it; but already it looked 
less dejected, as if it approved of the change in its fortunes. 
Sam was chewing an apple thoughtfully. He had a pocket full 
of them: a parting present from Nob and Bob. ‘Apples for 
walking, and a pipe for sitting,’ he said. ‘But I reckon I'll miss 
them both before long.’ 

The hobbits took no notice of the inquisitive heads that 
peeped out of doors, or popped over walls and fences, as 
they passed. But as they drew near to the further gate, Frodo 
saw a dark ill-kept house behind a thick hedge: the last house 
in the village. In one of the windows he caught a glimpse of 
a sallow face with sly, slanting eyes; but it vanished at once. 

‘So that’s where that southerner is hiding!’ he thought. ‘He 
looks more than half like a goblin.’ 

Over the hedge another man was staring boldly. He had 
heavy black brows, and dark scornful eyes; his large mouth 
curled in a sneer. He was smoking a short black pipe. As they 
approached he took it out of his mouth and spat. 

‘Morning, Longshanks!’ he said. ‘Off early? Found some 
friends at last?’ Strider nodded, but did not answer. 

‘Morning, my little friends!’ he said to the others. ‘I sup- 
pose you know who you’ve taken up with? That’s Stick-at- 
naught Strider, that is! Though [I’ve heard other names not 
so pretty. Watch out tonight! And you, Sammie, don’t go 
ill-treating my poor old pony! Pah!’ He spat again. 

Sam turned quickly. ‘And you, Ferny,’ he said, ‘put your 
ugly face out of sight, or it will get hurt.’ With a sudden flick, 


A KNIFE IN THE DARK 237 


quick as lightning, an apple left his hand and hit Bill square 
on the nose. He ducked too late, and curses came from 
behind the hedge. ‘Waste of a good apple,’ said Sam regret- 
fully, and strode on. 


At last they left the village behind. The escort of children 
and stragglers that had followed them got tired and turned 
back at the South-gate. Passing through, they kept on along 
the Road for some miles. It bent to the left, curving back into 
its eastward line as it rounded the feet of Bree-hill, and then 
it began to run swiftly downwards into wooded country. To 
their left they could see some of the houses and hobbit-holes 
of Staddle on the gentler south-eastern slopes of the hill; 
down in a deep hollow away north of the Road there were 
wisps of rising smoke that showed where Combe lay; Archet 
was hidden in the trees beyond. 

After the Road had run down some way, and had left 
Bree-hill standing tall and brown behind, they came on a 
narrow track that led off towards the North. “This is where 
we leave the open and take to cover,’ said Strider. 

‘Not a “‘short cut’’, I hope,’ said Pippin. ‘Our last short cut 
through woods nearly ended in disaster.’ 

‘Ah, but you had not got me with you then,’ laughed 
Strider. ‘My cuts, short or long, don’t go wrong.’ He took a 
look up and down the Road. No one was in sight; and he led 
the way quickly down towards the wooded valley. 

His plan, as far as they could understand it without know- 
ing the country, was to go towards Archet at first, but to bear 
right and pass it on the east, and then to steer as straight as 
he could over the wild lands to Weathertop Hill. In that way 
they would, if all went well, cut off a great loop of the Road, 
which further on bent southwards to avoid the Midgewater 
Marshes. But, of course, they would have to pass through 
the marshes themselves, and Strider’s description of them 
was not encouraging. 

However, in the meanwhile, walking was not unpleasant. 
Indeed, if it had not been for the disturbing events of the 


238 THE FELLOWSHIP OF THE RING 


night before, they would have enjoyed this part of the journey 
better than any up to that time. The sun was shining, clear 
but not too hot. The woods in the valley were still leafy and 
full of colour, and seemed peaceful and wholesome. Strider 
guided them confidently among the many crossing paths, 
although left to themselves they would soon have been at a 
loss. He was taking a wandering course with many turns and 
doublings, to put off any pursuit. 

‘Bill Ferny will have watched where we left the Road, for 
certain,’ he said; ‘though I don’t think he will follow us him- 
self. He knows the land round here well enough, but he knows 
he is not a match for me in a wood. It is what he may tell 
others that I am afraid of. I don’t suppose they are far away. 
If they think we have made for Archet, so much the better.’ 


Whether because of Strider’s skill or for some other reason, 
they saw no sign and heard no sound of any other living thing 
all that day: neither two-footed, except birds; nor four-footed, 
except one fox and a few squirrels. The next day they began 
to steer a steady course eastwards; and still all was quiet and 
peaceful. On the third day out from Bree they came out of the 
Chetwood. The land had been falling steadily, ever since they 
turned aside from the Road, and they now entered a wide flat 
expanse of country, much more difficult to manage. They were 
far beyond the borders of the Bree-land, out in the pathless 
wilderness, and drawing near to the Midgewater Marshes. 

The ground now became damp, and in places boggy and 
here and there they came upon pools, and wide stretches of 
reeds and rushes filled with the warbling of little hidden birds. 
They had to pick their way carefully to keep both dry-footed 
and on their proper course. At first they made fair progress, 
but as they went on, their passage became slower and more 
dangerous. The marshes were bewildering and treacherous, 
and there was no permanent trail even for Rangers to find 
through their shifting quagmires. The flies began to torment 
them, and the air was full of clouds of tiny midges that crept 
up their sleeves and breeches and into their hair. 


A KNIFE IN THE DARK 239 


‘Tam being eaten alive!’ cried Pippin. ‘Midgewater! There 
are more midges than water!’ 

‘What do they live on when they can’t get hobbit?’ asked 
Sam, scratching his neck. 

They spent a miserable day in this lonely and unpleasant 
country. Their camping-place was damp, cold, and uncom- 
fortable; and the biting insects would not let them sleep. 
There were also abominable creatures haunting the reeds and 
tussocks that from the sound of them were evil relatives of the 
cricket. There were thousands of them, and they squeaked all 
round, neek-breek, breek-neek, unceasingly all the night, until 
the hobbits were nearly frantic. 

The next day, the fourth, was little better, and the night 
almost as comfortless. Though the Neekerbreekers (as Sam 
called them) had been left behind, the midges still pursued 
them. 

As Frodo lay, tired but unable to close his eyes, it seemed 
to him that far away there came a light in the eastern sky: it 
flashed and faded many times. It was not the dawn, for that 
was still some hours off. 

‘What is the light?’ he said to Strider, who had risen, and 
was standing, gazing ahead into the night. 

‘I do not know,’ Strider answered. ‘It is too distant to make 
out. It is like lightning that leaps up from the hill-tops.’ 

Frodo lay down again, but for a long while he could still 
see the white flashes, and against them the tall dark figure of 
Strider, standing silent and watchful. At last he passed into 
uneasy sleep. 


They had not gone far on the fifth day when they left the 
last straggling pools and reed-beds of the marshes behind 
them. The land before them began steadily to rise again. 
Away in the distance eastward they could now see a line of 
hills. The highest of them was at the right of the line and a 
little separated from the others. It had a conical top, slightly 
flattened at the summit. 

“That is Weathertop,’ said Strider. “The Old Road, which 


240 THE FELLOWSHIP OF THE RING 


we have left far away on our right, runs to the south of it and 
passes not far from its foot. We might reach it by noon 
tomorrow, if we go straight towards it. I suppose we had 
better do so.’ 

‘What do you mean?’ asked Frodo. 

‘I mean: when we do get there, it is not certain what we 
shall find. It is close to the Road.’ 

‘But surely we were hoping to find Gandalf there?’ 

“Yes; but the hope is faint. If he comes this way at all, he 
may not pass through Bree, and so he may not know what 
we are doing. And anyway, unless by luck we arrive almost 
together, we shall miss one another; it will not be safe for him 
or for us to wait there long. If the Riders fail to find us in 
the wilderness, they are likely to make for Weathertop them- 
selves. It commands a wide view all round. Indeed, there are 
many birds and beasts in this country that could see us, as 
we stand here, from that hill-top. Not all the birds are to be 
trusted, and there are other spies more evil than they are.’ 

The hobbits looked anxiously at the distant hills. Sam 
looked up into the pale sky, fearing to see hawks or eagles 
hovering over them with bright unfriendly eyes. “You do 
make me feel uncomfortable and lonesome, Strider!’ he said. 

‘What do you advise us to do?’ asked Frodo. 

‘I think,’ answered Strider slowly, as if he was not quite 
sure, ‘I think the best thing is to go as straight eastward from 
here as we can, to make for the line of hills, not for 
Weathertop. There we can strike a path I know that runs at 
their feet; it will bring us to Weathertop from the north and 
less openly. Then we shall see what we shall see.’ 


All that day they plodded along, until the cold and early 
evening came down. The land became drier and more barren; 
but mists and vapours lay behind them on the marshes. A 
few melancholy birds were piping and wailing, until the round 
red sun sank slowly into the western shadows; then an empty 
silence fell. The hobbits thought of the soft light of sunset 
glancing through the cheerful windows of Bag End far away. 


A KNIFE IN THE DARK 241 


At the day’s end they came to a stream that wandered 
down from the hills to lose itself in the stagnant marshland, 
and they went up along its banks while the light lasted. It was 
already night when at last they halted and made their camp 
under some stunted alder-trees by the shores of the stream. 
Ahead there loomed now against the dusky sky the bleak and 
treeless backs of the hills. That night they set a watch, and 
Strider, it seemed, did not sleep at all. The moon was waxing, 
and in the early night-hours a cold grey light lay on the land. 

Next morning they set out again soon after sunrise. There 
was a frost in the air, and the sky was a pale clear blue. The 
hobbits felt refreshed, as if they had had a night of unbroken 
sleep. Already they were getting used to much walking on 
short commons -— shorter at any rate than what in the Shire 
they would have thought barely enough to keep them on their 
legs. Pippin declared that Frodo was looking twice the hobbit 
that he had been. 

‘Very odd,’ said Frodo, tightening his belt, ‘considering 
that there is actually a good deal less of me. I hope the 
thinning process will not go on indefinitely, or I shall become 
a wraith.’ 

‘Do not speak of such things!’ said Strider quickly, and 
with surprising earnestness. 


The hills drew nearer. They made an undulating ridge, 
often rising almost to a thousand feet, and here and there 
falling again to low clefts or passes leading into the eastern 
land beyond. Along the crest of the ridge the hobbits could 
see what looked to be the remains of green-grown walls and 
dikes, and in the clefts there still stood the ruins of old works 
of stone. By night they had reached the feet of the westward 
slopes, and there they camped. It was the night of the fifth 
of October, and they were six days out from Bree. 

In the morning they found, for the first time since they had 
left the Chetwood, a track plain to see. They turned right 
and followed it southwards. It ran cunningly, taking a line 
that seemed chosen so as to keep as much hidden as possible 


242 THE FELLOWSHIP OF THE RING 


from the view, both of the hill-tops above and of the flats to 
the west. It dived into dells, and hugged steep banks; and 
where it passed over flatter and more open ground on either 
side of it there were lines of large boulders and hewn stones 
that screened the travellers almost like a hedge. 

‘I wonder who made this path, and what for,’ said Merry, 
as they walked along one of these avenues, where the stones 
were unusually large and closely set. ‘I am not sure that I like 
it: it has a — well, rather a barrow-wightish look. Is there any 
barrow on Weathertop?’ 

‘No. There is no barrow on Weathertop, nor on any of 
these hills,’ answered Strider. “The Men of the West did not 
live here; though in their latter days they defended the hills 
for a while against the evil that came out of Angmar. This 
path was made to serve the forts along the walls. But long 
before, in the first days of the North Kingdom, they built a 
great watch-tower on Weathertop, Amon Sal they called it. 
It was burned and broken, and nothing remains of it now but 
a tumbled ring, like a rough crown on the old hill’s head. Yet 
once it was tall and fair. It is told that Elendil stood there 
watching for the coming of Gil-galad out of the West, in the 
days of the Last Alliance.’ 

The hobbits gazed at Strider. It seemed that he was learned 
in old lore, as well as in the ways of the wild. ‘Who was 
Gil-galad?’ asked Merry; but Strider did not answer, and 
seemed to be lost in thought. Suddenly a low voice 
murmured: 


Gil-galad was an Elven-king. 

Of him the harpers sadly sing: 

the last whose realm was fair and free 
between the Mountains and the Sea. 


His sword was long, his lance was keen, 
his shining helm afar was seen; 

the countless stars of heaven’s field 
were mirrored in his silver shield. 


A KNIFE IN THE DARK 243 


But long ago he rode away, 

and where he dwelleth none can say; 
for into darkness fell his star 

in Mordor where the shadows are. 


The others turned in amazement, for the voice was Sam’s. 

‘Don’t stop!’ said Merry. 

“That’s all I know,’ stammered Sam, blushing. ‘I learned it 
from Mr. Bilbo when I was a lad. He used to tell me tales 
like that, knowing how I was always one for hearing about 
Elves. It was Mr. Bilbo as taught me my letters. He was 
mighty book-learned was dear old Mr. Bilbo. And he wrote 
poetry. He wrote what I have just said.’ 

‘He did not make it up,’ said Strider. ‘It is part of the lay 
that is called The Fall of Gil-galad, which is in an ancient 
tongue. Bilbo must have translated it. I never knew that.’ 

“There was a lot more,’ said Sam, ‘all about Mordor. I 
didn’t learn that part, it gave me the shivers. I never thought 
I should be going that way myself!’ 

‘Going to Mordor!’ cried Pippin. ‘I hope it won’t come to 
that!’ 

‘Do not speak that name so loudly!’ said Strider. 


It was already mid-day when they drew near the southern 
end of the path, and saw before them, in the pale clear light 
of the October sun, a grey-green bank, leading up like a 
bridge on to the northward slope of the hill. They decided 
to make for the top at once, while the daylight was broad. 
Concealment was no longer possible, and they could only 
hope that no enemy or spy was observing them. Nothing was 
to be seen moving on the hill. If Gandalf was anywhere about, 
there was no sign of him. 

On the western flank of Weathertop they found a sheltered 
hollow, at the bottom of which there was a bowl-shaped dell 
with grassy sides. There they left Sam and Pippin with the 
pony and their packs and luggage. The other three went on. 
After half an hour’s plodding climb Strider reached the crown 


244 THE FELLOWSHIP OF THE RING 


of the hill; Frodo and Merry followed, tired and breathless. 
The last slope had been steep and rocky. 

On the top they found, as Strider had said, a wide ring of 
ancient stone-work, now crumbling or covered with age-long 
grass. But in the centre a cairn of broken stones had been 
piled. They were blackened as if with fire. About them the 
turf was burned to the roots and all within the ring the grass 
was scorched and shrivelled, as if flames had swept the hill- 
top; but there was no sign of any living thing. 

Standing upon the rim of the ruined circle, they saw all 
round below them a wide prospect, for the most part of lands 
empty and featureless, except for patches of woodland away 
to the south, beyond which they caught here and there the 
glint of distant water. Beneath them on this southern side 
there ran like a ribbon the Old Road, coming out of the West 
and winding up and down, until it faded behind a ridge of 
dark land to the east. Nothing was moving on it. Following 
its line eastward with their eyes they saw the Mountains: the 
nearer foothills were brown and sombre; behind them stood 
taller shapes of grey, and behind those again were high white 
peaks glimmering among the clouds. 

‘Well, here we are!’ said Merry. ‘And very cheerless and 
uninviting it looks! There is no water and no shelter. And no 
sign of Gandalf. But I don’t blame him for not waiting — if 
he ever came here.’ 

‘I wonder,’ said Strider, looking round thoughtfully. ‘Even 
if he was a day or two behind us at Bree, he could have 
arrived here first. He can ride very swiftly when need presses.’ 
Suddenly he stooped and looked at the stone on the top of 
the cairn; it was flatter than the others, and whiter, as if it 
had escaped the fire. He picked it up and examined it, turning 
it in his fingers. “Chis has been handled recently,’ he said. 
‘What do you think of these marks?’ 

On the flat under-side Frodo saw some scratches: “11 
“There seems to be a stroke, a dot, and three more strokes,’ 
he said. 

“The stroke on the left might be a G-rune with thin 


A KNIFE IN THE DARK 245 


branches,’ said Strider. ‘It might be a sign left by Gandalf, 
though one cannot be sure. The scratches are fine, and they 
certainly look fresh. But the marks might mean something 
quite different, and have nothing to do with us. Rangers use 
runes, and they come here sometimes.’ 

‘What could they mean, even if Gandalf made them?’ 
asked Merry. 

‘I should say,’ answered Strider, ‘that they stood for G3, 
and were a sign that Gandalf was here on October the third: 
that is three days ago now. It would also show that he was in 
a hurry and danger was at hand, so that he had no time or 
did not dare to write anything longer or plainer. If that is so, 
we must be wary.’ 

‘I wish we could feel sure that he made the marks, whatever 
they may mean,’ said Frodo. ‘It would be a great comfort to 
know that he was on the way, in front of us or behind us.’ 

‘Perhaps,’ said Strider. ‘For myself, I believe that he was 
here, and was in danger. There have been scorching flames 
here; and now the light that we saw three nights ago in the 
eastern sky comes back to my mind. I guess that he was 
attacked on this hill-top, but with what result I cannot tell. 
He is here no longer, and we must now look after ourselves 
and make our own way to Rivendell, as best we can.’ 

‘How far is Rivendell?’ asked Merry, gazing round wearily. 
The world looked wild and wide from Weathertop. 

‘I don’t know if the Road has ever been measured in miles 
beyond the Forsaken Inn, a day’s journey east of Bree,’ 
answered Strider. ‘Some say it is so far, and some say other- 
wise. It is a strange road, and folk are glad to reach their 
journey’s end, whether the time is long or short. But I know 
how long it would take me on my own feet, with fair weather 
and no ill fortune: twelve days from here to the Ford of 
Bruinen, where the Road crosses the Loudwater that runs 
out of Rivendell. We have at least a fortnight’s journey before 
us, for I do not think we shall be able to use the Road.’ 

‘A fortnight!’ said Frodo. ‘A lot may happen in that time.’ 

‘It may,’ said Strider. 


246 THE FELLOWSHIP OF THE RING 


They stood for a while silent on the hill-top, near its south- 
ward edge. In that lonely place Frodo for the first time fully 
realized his homelessness and danger. He wished bitterly that 
his fortune had left him in the quiet and beloved Shire. He 
stared down at the hateful Road, leading back westward — to 
his home. Suddenly he was aware that two black specks were 
moving slowly along it, going westward; and looking again 
he saw that three others were creeping eastward to meet 
them. He gave a cry and clutched Strider’s arm. 

‘Look,’ he said, pointing downwards. 

At once Strider flung himself on the ground behind the 
ruined circle, pulling Frodo down beside him. Merry threw 
himself alongside. 

‘What is it?’ he whispered. 

‘I do not know, but I fear the worst,’ answered Strider. 

Slowly they crawled up to the edge of the ring again, and 
peered through a cleft between two jagged stones. The light 
was no longer bright, for the clear morning had faded, and 
clouds creeping out of the East had now overtaken the sun, 
as it began to go down. They could all see the black specks, 
but neither Frodo nor Merry could make out their shapes for 
certain; yet something told them that there, far below, were 
Black Riders assembling on the Road beyond the foot of the 
hill. 

‘Yes,’ said Strider, whose keener sight left him in no doubt. 
“The enemy is here!’ 

Hastily they crept away and slipped down the north side 
of the hill to find their companions. 


Sam and Peregrin had not been idle. They had explored 
the small dell and the surrounding slopes. Not far away they 
found a spring of clear water in the hillside, and near it 
footprints not more than a day or two old. In the dell itself 
they found recent traces of a fire, and other signs of a hasty 
camp. There were some fallen rocks on the edge of the dell 
nearest to the hill. Behind them Sam came upon a small store 
of firewood neatly stacked. 


A KNIFE IN THE DARK 247 


‘I wonder if old Gandalf has been here,’ he said to Pippin. 
‘Whoever it was put this stuff here meant to come back it 
seems.’ 

Strider was greatly interested in these discoveries. ‘I wish I 
had waited and explored the ground down here myself,’ he 
said, hurrying off to the spring to examine the footprints. 

‘It is ust as I feared,’ he said, when he came back. ‘Sam 
and Pippin have trampled the soft ground, and the marks are 
spoilt or confused. Rangers have been here lately. It is they 
who left the firewood behind. But there are also several newer 
tracks that were not made by Rangers. At least one set was 
made, only a day or two ago, by heavy boots. At least one. I 
cannot now be certain, but I think there were many booted 
feet.’ He paused and stood in anxious thought. 

Each of the hobbits saw in his mind a vision of the cloaked 
and booted Riders. If the horsemen had already found the dell, 
the sooner Strider led them somewhere else the better. Sam 
viewed the hollow with great dislike, now that he had heard 
news of their enemies on the Road, only a few miles away. 

‘Hadn’t we better clear out quick, Mr. Strider?’ he asked 
impatiently. ‘It is getting late, and I don’t like this hole: it 
makes my heart sink somehow.’ 

“Yes, we certainly must decide what to do at once,’ 
answered Strider, looking up and considering the time and 
the weather. ‘Well, Sam,’ he said at last, ‘I do not like this 
place either; but I cannot think of anywhere better that we 
could reach before nightfall. At least we are out of sight for 
the moment, and if we moved we should be much more likely 
to be seen by spies. All we could do would be to go right out 
of our way back north on this side of the line of hills, where 
the land is all much the same as it is here. The Road is 
watched, but we should have to cross it, if we tried to take 
cover in the thickets away to the south. On the north side of 
the Road beyond the hills the country is bare and flat for 
miles.’ 

‘Can the Riders see?’ asked Merry. ‘I mean, they seem 
usually to have used their noses rather than their eyes, 


248 THE FELLOWSHIP OF THE RING 


smelling for us, if smelling is the right word, at least in the 
daylight. But you made us lie down flat when you saw them 
down below; and now you talk of being seen, if we move.’ 

‘I was too careless on the hill-top,’ answered Strider. ‘I was 
very anxious to find some sign of Gandalf; but it was a 
mistake for three of us to go up and stand there so long. For 
the black horses can see, and the Riders can use men and 
other creatures as spies, as we found at Bree. They themselves 
do not see the world of light as we do, but our shapes cast 
shadows in their minds, which only the noon sun destroys; 
and in the dark they perceive many signs and forms that are 
hidden from us: then they are most to be feared. And at all 
times they smell the blood of living things, desiring and hating 
it. Senses, too, there are other than sight or smell. We can 
feel their presence — it troubled our hearts, as soon as we 
came here, and before we saw them; they feel ours more 
keenly. Also,’ he added, and his voice sank to a whisper, ‘the 
Ring draws them.’ 

‘Is there no escape then?’ said Frodo, looking round wildly. 
‘If I move I shall be seen and hunted! If I stay, I shall draw 
them to me!’ 

Strider laid his hand on his shoulder. “There is still hope,’ he 
said. “You are not alone. Let us take this wood that is set ready 
for the fire as a sign. There is little shelter or defence here, but 
fire shall serve for both. Sauron can put fire to his evil uses, as 
he can all things, but these Riders do not love it, and fear those 
who wield it. Fire is our friend in the wilderness.’ 

‘Maybe,’ muttered Sam. ‘It is also as good a way of saying 
“here we are” as I can think of, bar shouting.’ 


Down in the lowest and most sheltered corner of the dell 
they lit a fire, and prepared a meal. The shades of evening 
began to fall, and it grew cold. They were suddenly aware 
of great hunger, for they had not eaten anything since break- 
fast; but they dared not make more than a frugal supper. 
The lands ahead were empty of all save birds and beasts, 
unfriendly places deserted by all the races of the world. 


A KNIFE IN THE DARK 249 


Rangers passed at times beyond the hills, but they were few 
and did not stay. Other wanderers were rare, and of evil sort: 
trolls might stray down at times out of the northern valleys 
of the Misty Mountains. Only on the Road would travellers 
be found, most often dwarves, hurrying along on business of 
their own, and with no help and few words to spare for 
strangers. 

‘I don’t see how our food can be made to last,’ said Frodo. 
‘We have been careful enough in the last few days, and this 
supper is no feast; but we have used more than we ought, if 
we have two weeks still to go, and perhaps more.’ 

“There is food in the wild,’ said Strider; ‘berry, root, and 
herb; and I have some skill as a hunter at need. You need not 
be afraid of starving before winter comes. But gathering and 
catching food is long and weary work, and we need haste. So 
tighten your belts, and think with hope of the tables of 
Elrond’s house!’ 

The cold increased as darkness came on. Peering out from 
the edge of the dell they could see nothing but a grey land 
now vanishing quickly into shadow. The sky above had 
cleared again and was slowly filled with twinkling stars. Frodo 
and his companions huddled round the fire, wrapped in every 
garment and blanket they possessed; but Strider was content 
with a single cloak, and sat a little apart, drawing thoughtfully 
at his pipe. 

As night fell and the light of the fire began to shine out 
brightly he began to tell them tales to keep their minds from 
fear. He knew many histories and legends of long ago, of 
Elves and Men and the good and evil deeds of the Elder 
Days. They wondered how old he was, and where he had 
learned all this lore. 

“Tell us of Gil-galad,’ said Merry suddenly, when he 
paused at the end of a story of the Elf-kingdoms. ‘Do you 
know any more of that old lay that you spoke of ?’ 

‘I do indeed,’ answered Strider. ‘So also does Frodo, for it 
concerns us closely.’ Merry and Pippin looked at Frodo, who 
was staring into the fire. 


250 THE FELLOWSHIP OF THE RING 


‘I know only the little that Gandalf has told me,’ said Frodo 
slowly. ‘Gil-galad was the last of the great Elf-kings of 
Middle-earth. Gil-galad is Starlight in their tongue. With 
Elendil, the Elf-friend, he went to the land of- > 

‘No!’ said Strider interrupting, ‘I do not think that tale 
should be told now with the servants of the Enemy at hand. 
If we win through to the house of Elrond, you may hear it 
there, told in full.’ 

“Then tell us some other tale of the old days,’ begged Sam; 
‘a tale about the Elves before the fading time. I would dearly 
like to hear more about Elves; the dark seems to press round 
so close.’ 

‘T will tell you the tale of Tintiviel,’ said Strider, ‘in brief — 
for it is a long tale of which the end is not known; and there 
are none now, except Elrond, that remember it aright as it 
was told of old. It is a fair tale, though it is sad, as are all the 
tales of Middle-earth, and yet it may lift up your hearts.’ He 
was silent for some time, and then he began not to speak but 
to chant softly: 


The leaves were long, the grass was green, 
The hemlock-umbels tall and fair, 
And in the glade a light was seen 
Of stars in shadow shimmering. 
Tinuviel was dancing there 
To music of a pipe unseen, 
And light of stars was in her hair, 
And tn her raiment glimmering. 


There Beren came from mountains cold, 
And lost he wandered under leaves, 
And where the Elven-river rolled 
He walked alone and sorrowing. 
He peered between the hemlock-leaves 
And saw in wonder flowers of gold 
Upon her mantle and her sleeves, 
And her hair like shadow following. 


A KNIFE IN THE DARK 


Enchantment healed his weary feet 
That over hills were doomed to roam; 
And forth he hastened, strong and fleet, 
And grasped at moonbeams glistening. 
Through woven woods in Elvenhome 
She lightly fled on dancing feet, 
And left him lonely still to roam 
In the silent forest listening. 


He heard there oft the flying sound 
Of feet as light as linden-leaves, 
Or music welling underground, 
In hidden hollows quavering. 
Now withered lay the hemlock-sheaves, 
And one by one with sighing sound 
Whispering fell the beechen leaves 
In the wintry woodland wavering. 


He sought her ever, wandering far 
Where leaves of years were thickly strewn, 
By light of moon and ray of star 
In frosty heavens shivering. 
Her mantle glinted in the moon, 
As on a hill-top high and far 
She danced, and at her feet was strewn 
A mist of silver quivering. 


When winter passed, she came again, 
And her song released the sudden spring, 
Like rising lark, and falling rain, 
And melting water bubbling. 
He saw the elven-flowers spring 
About her feet, and healed again 
He longed by her to dance and sing 
Upon the grass untroubling. 


251 


252 THE FELLOWSHIP OF THE RING 


Again she fled, but swift he came. 
Tinuviel! Tiniviel! 
He called her by her Elvish name; 
And there she halted listening. 
One moment stood she, and a spell 
Fits voice laid on her: Beren came, 
And doom fell on Tintiviel 
That in his arms lay glistening. 


As Beren looked into her eyes 
Within the shadows of her hair, 
The trembling starlight of the skies 
He saw there mirrored shimmering. 
Tinuviel the elven-fatr, 
Immortal maiden elven-wise, 
About him cast her shadowy hair 
And arms like silver glimmering. 


Long was the way that fate them bore, 
O’er stony mountains cold and grey, 
Through halls of tron and darkling door, 

And woods of nightshade morrowless. 
The Sundering Seas between them lay, 
And yet at last they met once more, 

And long ago they passed away 
In the forest singing sorrowless. 


Strider sighed and paused before he spoke again. “That is 
a song,’ he said, ‘in the mode that is called ann-thennath 
among the Elves, but is hard to render in our Common 
Speech, and this is but a rough echo of it. It tells of the 
meeting of Beren son of Barahir and Luthien Tinutviel. Beren 
was a mortal man, but Luthien was the daughter of Thingol, 
a King of Elves upon Middle-earth when the world was 
young; and she was the fairest maiden that has ever been 
among all the children of this world. As the stars above the 
mists of the Northern lands was her loveliness, and in her 


A KNIFE IN THE DARK 253 


face was a shining light. In those days the Great Enemy, 
of whom Sauron of Mordor was but a servant, dwelt in 
Angband in the North, and the Elves of the West coming 
back to Middle-earth made war upon him to regain the 
Silmarils which he had stolen; and the fathers of Men aided 
the Elves. But the Enemy was victorious and Barahir was 
slain, and Beren escaping through great peril came over the 
Mountains of Terror into the hidden Kingdom of Thingol in 
the forest of Neldoreth. There he beheld Luthien singing and 
dancing in a glade beside the enchanted river Esgalduin; and 
he named her Tintviel, that is Nightingale in the language 
of old. Many sorrows befell them afterwards, and they were 
parted long. Tintviel rescued Beren from the dungeons of 
Sauron, and together they passed through great dangers, and 
cast down even the Great Enemy from his throne, and took 
from his iron crown one of the three Silmarils, brightest of 
all jewels, to be the bride-price of Luthien to Thingol her 
father. Yet at the last Beren was slain by the Wolf that came 
from the gates of Angband, and he died in the arms of 
Tintviel. But she chose mortality, and to die from the world, 
so that she might follow him; and it is sung that they met 
again beyond the Sundering Seas, and after a brief time walk- 
ing alive once more in the green woods, together they passed, 
long ago, beyond the confines of this world. So it is that 
Luthien Tintviel alone of the Elf-kindred has died indeed 
and left the world, and they have lost her whom they most 
loved. But from her the lineage of the Elf-lords of old 
descended among Men. There live still those of whom 
Luthien was the foremother, and it is said that her line shall 
never fail. Elrond of Rivendell is of that Kin. For of Beren 
and Luthien was born Dior Thingol’s heir; and of him Elwing 
the White whom Edrendil wedded, he that sailed his ship out 
of the mists of the world into the seas of heaven with the 
Silmaril upon his brow. And of Earendil came the Kings of 
Numenor, that is Westernesse.’ 

As Strider was speaking they watched his strange eager 
face, dimly lit in the red glow of the wood-fire. His eyes 


254 THE FELLOWSHIP OF THE RING 


shone, and his voice was rich and deep. Above him was a 
black starry sky. Suddenly a pale light appeared over the 
crown of Weathertop behind him. The waxing moon was 
climbing slowly above the hill that overshadowed them, and 
the stars above the hill-top faded. 

The story ended. The hobbits moved and stretched. 
‘Look!’ said Merry. “Che Moon is rising: it must be getting 
late.’ 

The others looked up. Even as they did so, they saw on 
the top of the hill something small and dark against the glim- 
mer of the moonrise. It was perhaps only a large stone or 
jutting rock shown up by the pale light. 

Sam and Merry got up and walked away from the fire. 
Frodo and Pippin remained seated in silence. Strider was 
watching the moonlight on the hill intently. All seemed quiet 
and still, but Frodo felt a cold dread creeping over his heart, 
now that Strider was no longer speaking. He huddled closer 
to the fire. At that moment Sam came running back from the 
edge of the dell. 

‘I don’t know what it is,’ he said, ‘but I suddenly felt afraid. 
I durstn’t go outside this dell for any money; I felt that some- 
thing was creeping up the slope.’ 

‘Did you see anything?’ asked Frodo, springing to his feet. 

‘No, sir. I saw nothing, but I didn’t stop to look.’ 

‘I saw something,’ said Merry; ‘or I thought I did — away 
westwards where the moonlight was falling on the flats 
beyond the shadow of the hill-tops, I thought there were two 
or three black shapes. They seemed to be moving this way.’ 

‘Keep close to the fire, with your faces outward!’ cried 
Strider. “Get some of the longer sticks ready in your hands!’ 

For a breathless time they sat there, silent and alert, with 
their backs turned to the wood-fire, each gazing into the 
shadows that encircled them. Nothing happened. There was 
no sound or movement in the night. Frodo stirred, feeling 
that he must break the silence: he longed to shout out aloud. 

‘Hush!’ whispered Strider. ‘What’s that?’ gasped Pippin at 
the same moment. 


A KNIFE IN THE DARK 255 


Over the lip of the little dell, on the side away from the 
hill, they felt, rather than saw, a shadow rise, one shadow or 
more than one. They strained their eyes, and the shadows 
seemed to grow. Soon there could be no doubt: three or four 
tall black figures were standing there on the slope, looking 
down on them. So black were they that they seemed like 
black holes in the deep shade behind them. Frodo thought 
that he heard a faint hiss as of venomous breath and felt a 
thin piercing chill. Then the shapes slowly advanced. 

Terror overcame Pippin and Merry, and they threw them- 
selves flat on the ground. Sam shrank to Frodo’s side. Frodo 
was hardly less terrified than his companions; he was quaking 
as if he was bitter cold, but his terror was swallowed up in a 
sudden temptation to put on the Ring. The desire to do this 
laid hold of him, and he could think of nothing else. He 
did not forget the Barrow, nor the message of Gandalf; 
but something seemed to be compelling him to disregard 
all warnings, and he longed to yield. Not with the hope of 
escape, or of doing anything, either good or bad: he simply 
felt that he must take the Ring and put it on his finger. He 
could not speak. He felt Sam looking at him, as if he knew 
that his master was in some great trouble, but he could not 
turn towards him. He shut his eyes and struggled for a while; 
but resistance became unbearable, and at last he slowly drew 
out the chain, and slipped the Ring on the forefinger of his 
left hand. 

Immediately, though everything else remained as before, 
dim and dark, the shapes became terribly clear. He was able 
to see beneath their black wrappings. There were five tall 
figures: two standing on the lip of the dell, three advancing. 
In their white faces burned keen and merciless eyes; under 
their mantles were long grey robes; upon their grey hairs were 
helms of silver; in their haggard hands were swords of steel. 
Their eyes fell on him and pierced him, as they rushed 
towards him. Desperate, he drew his own sword, and it 
seemed to him that it flickered red, as if it was a firebrand. 
Two of the figures halted. The third was taller than the others: 


256 THE FELLOWSHIP OF THE RING 


his hair was long and gleaming and on his helm was a crown. 
In one hand he held a long sword, and in the other a knife; 
both the knife and the hand that held it glowed with a pale 
light. He sprang forward and bore down on Frodo. 

At that moment Frodo threw himself forward on the 
ground, and he heard himself crying aloud: O Elbereth! 
Gilthoniel! At the same time he struck at the feet of his enemy. 
A shrill cry rang out in the night; and he felt a pain like a dart 
of poisoned ice pierce his left shoulder. Even as he swooned 
he caught, as through a swirling mist, a glimpse of Strider 
leaping out of the darkness with a flaming brand of wood in 
either hand. With a last effort Frodo, dropping his sword, 
slipped the Ring from his finger and closed his right hand 
tight upon it. 


Chapter 12 


FLIGHT TO THE FORD 


When Frodo came to himself he was still clutching the Ring 
desperately. He was lying by the fire, which was now piled 
high and burning brightly. His three companions were bend- 
ing over him. 

‘What has happened? Where is the pale king?’ he asked 
wildly. 

They were too overjoyed to hear him speak to answer for 
a while; nor did they understand his question. At length he 
gathered from Sam that they had seen nothing but the vague 
shadowy shapes coming towards them. Suddenly to his 
horror Sam found that his master had vanished; and at that 
moment a black shadow rushed past him, and he fell. He 
heard Frodo’s voice, but it seemed to come from a great 
distance, or from under the earth, crying out strange words. 
They saw nothing more, until they stumbled over the body 
of Frodo, lying as if dead, face downwards on the grass with 
his sword beneath him. Strider ordered them to pick him up 
and lay him near the fire, and then he disappeared. That was 
now a good while ago. 

Sam plainly was beginning to have doubts again about 
Strider; but while they were talking he returned, appearing 
suddenly out of the shadows. They started, and Sam drew 
his sword and stood over Frodo; but Strider knelt down 
swiftly at his side. 

‘Tam not a Black Rider, Sam,’ he said gently, ‘nor in league 
with them. I have been trying to discover something of their 
movements; but I have found nothing. I cannot think why 
they have gone and do not attack again. But there is no feeling 
of their presence anywhere at hand.’ 

When he heard what Frodo had to tell, he became full of 


258 THE FELLOWSHIP OF THE RING 


concern, and shook his head and sighed. Then he ordered 
Pippin and Merry to heat as much water as they could in 
their small kettles, and to bathe the wound with it. ‘Keep the 
fire going well, and keep Frodo warm!’ he said. Then he 
got up and walked away, and called Sam to him. ‘I think I 
understand things better now,’ he said in a low voice. “There 
seem only to have been five of the enemy. Why they were 
not all here, I don’t know; but I don’t think they expected to 
be resisted. They have drawn off for the time being. But not 
far, I fear. They will come again another night, if we cannot 
escape. They are only waiting, because they think that their 
purpose is almost accomplished, and that the Ring cannot fly 
much further. I fear, Sam, that they believe your master has 
a deadly wound that will subdue him to their will. We shall 
see!’ 

Sam choked with tears. ‘Don’t despair!’ said Strider. ‘You 
must trust me now. Your Frodo is made of sterner stuff than 
I had guessed, though Gandalf hinted that it might prove so. 
He is not slain, and I think he will resist the evil power of the 
wound longer than his enemies expect. I will do all I can to 
help and heal him. Guard him well, while I am away!’ He 
hurried off and disappeared again into the darkness. 


Frodo dozed, though the pain of his wound was slowly 
growing, and a deadly chill was spreading from his shoulder 
to his arm and side. His friends watched over him, warming 
him, and bathing his wound. The night passed slowly and 
wearily. Dawn was growing in the sky, and the dell was filling 
with grey light, when Strider at last returned. 

‘Look!’ he cried; and stooping he lifted from the ground a 
black cloak that had lain there hidden by the darkness. A foot 
above the lower hem there was a slash. “This was the stroke 
of Frodo’s sword,’ he said. “The only hurt that it did to his 
enemy, I fear; for it is unharmed, but all blades perish that 
pierce that dreadful King. More deadly to him was the name 
of Elbereth.’ 

‘And more deadly to Frodo was this!’ He stooped again 


FLIGHT TO THE FORD 259 


and lifted up a long thin knife. There was a cold gleam in it. 
As Strider raised it they saw that near the end its edge was 
notched and the point was broken off. But even as he held it 
up in the growing light, they gazed in astonishment, for the 
blade seemed to melt, and vanished like a smoke in the air, 
leaving only the hilt in Strider’s hand. ‘Alas!’ he cried. ‘It was 
this accursed knife that gave the wound. Few now have the 
skill in healing to match such evil weapons. But I will do what 
I can.’ 

He sat down on the ground, and taking the dagger-hilt laid 
it on his knees, and he sang over it a slow song in a strange 
tongue. Then setting it aside, he turned to Frodo and in a 
soft tone spoke words the others could not catch. From the 
pouch at his belt he drew out the long leaves of a plant. 

“These leaves,’ he said, ‘I have walked far to find; for 
this plant does not grow in the bare hills; but in the thickets 
away south of the Road I found it in the dark by the scent 
of its leaves.’ He crushed a leaf in his fingers, and it gave out 
a sweet and pungent fragrance. ‘It is fortunate that I could 
find it, for it is a healing plant that the Men of the West 
brought to Middle-earth. Athelas they named it, and it grows 
now sparsely and only near places where they dwelt or 
camped of old; and it is not known in the North, except to 
some of those who wander in the Wild. It has great virtues, 
but over such a wound as this its healing powers may be 
small.’ 

He threw the leaves into boiling water and bathed Frodo’s 
shoulder. The fragrance of the steam was refreshing, and 
those that were unhurt felt their minds calmed and cleared. 
The herb had also some power over the wound, for Frodo 
felt the pain and also the sense of frozen cold lessen in his 
side; but the life did not return to his arm, and he could not 
raise or use his hand. He bitterly regretted his foolishness, 
and reproached himself for weakness of will; for he now 
perceived that in putting on the Ring he obeyed not his 
own desire but the commanding wish of his enemies. He 
wondered if he would remain maimed for life, and how they 


260 THE FELLOWSHIP OF THE RING 


would now manage to continue their journey. He felt too 
weak to stand. 

The others were discussing this very question. They 
quickly decided to leave Weathertop as soon as possible. ‘I 
think now,’ said Strider, ‘that the enemy has been watching 
this place for some days. If Gandalf ever came here, then he 
must have been forced to ride away, and he will not return. 
In any case we are in great peril here after dark, since the 
attack of last night, and we can hardly meet greater danger 
wherever we go.’ 

As soon as the daylight was full, they had some hurried 
food and packed. It was impossible for Frodo to walk, so they 
divided the greater part of their baggage among the four of 
them, and put Frodo on the pony. In the last few days the 
poor beast had improved wonderfully; it already seemed fat- 
ter and stronger, and had begun to show an affection for its 
new masters, especially for Sam. Bill Ferny’s treatment must 
have been very hard for the journey in the wild to seem so 
much better than its former life. 

They started off in a southerly direction. This would mean 
crossing the Road, but it was the quickest way to more 
wooded country. And they needed fuel; for Strider said that 
Frodo must be kept warm, especially at night, while fire 
would be some protection for them all. It was also his plan 
to shorten their journey by cutting across another great loop 
of the Road: east beyond Weathertop it changed its course 
and took a wide bend northwards. 


They made their way slowly and cautiously round the 
south-western slopes of the hill, and came in a little while to 
the edge of the Road. There was no sign of the Riders. But 
even as they were hurrying across they heard far away two 
cries: a cold voice calling and a cold voice answering. ‘Trem- 
bling they sprang forward, and made for the thickets that lay 
ahead. The land before them sloped away southwards, but it 
was wild and pathless; bushes and stunted trees grew in dense 
patches with wide barren spaces in between. The grass was 


FLIGHT TO THE FORD 261 


scanty, coarse, and grey; and the leaves in the thickets were 
faded and falling. It was a cheerless land, and their journey 
was slow and gloomy. They spoke little as they trudged 
along. Frodo’s heart was grieved as he watched them walking 
beside him with their heads down, and their backs bowed 
under their burdens. Even Strider seemed tired and heavy- 
hearted. 

Before the first day’s march was over Frodo’s pain began 
to grow again, but he did not speak of it for a long time. Four 
days passed, without the ground or the scene changing 
much, except that behind them Weathertop slowly sank, and 
before them the distant mountains loomed a little nearer. Yet 
since that far cry they had seen and heard no sign that the 
enemy had marked their flight or followed them. They 
dreaded the dark hours, and kept watch in pairs by night, 
expecting at any time to see black shapes stalking in the 
grey night, dimly lit by the cloud-veiled moon; but they saw 
nothing, and heard no sound but the sigh of withered leaves 
and grass. Not once did they feel the sense of present evil 
that had assailed them before the attack in the dell. It seemed 
too much to hope that the Riders had already lost their trail 
again. Perhaps they were waiting to make some ambush in a 
narrow place? 

At the end of the fifth day the ground began once more to 
rise slowly out of the wide shallow valley into which they had 
descended. Strider now turned their course again north- 
eastwards, and on the sixth day they reached the top of a 
long slow-climbing slope, and saw far ahead a huddle of 
wooded hills. Away below them they could see the Road 
sweeping round the feet of the hills; and to their right a grey 
river gleamed pale in the thin sunshine. In the distance they 
glimpsed yet another river in a stony valley half-veiled in 
mist. 

‘Tam afraid we must go back to the Road here for a while,’ 
said Strider. ‘We have now come to the River Hoarwell, that 
the Elves call Mitheithel. It flows down out of the Ettenmoors, 
the troll-fells north of Rivendell, and joins the Loudwater 


262 THE FELLOWSHIP OF THE RING 


away in the South. Some call it the Greyflood after that. It is 
a great water before it finds the Sea. There is no way over it 
below its sources in the Ettenmoors, except by the Last 
Bridge on which the Road crosses.’ 

‘What is that other river we can see far away there?’ asked 
Merry. 

“That is Loudwater, the Bruinen of Rivendell,’ answered 
Strider. “The Road runs along the edge of the hills for many 
miles from the Bridge to the Ford of Bruinen. But I have not 
yet thought how we shall cross that water. One river at a 
time! We shall be fortunate indeed if we do not find the Last 
Bridge held against us.’ 


Next day, early in the morning, they came down again to 
the borders of the Road. Sam and Strider went forward, but 
they found no sign of any travellers or riders. Here under the 
shadow of the hills there had been some rain. Strider judged 
that it had fallen two days before, and had washed away all 
footprints. No horseman had passed since then, as far as he 
could see. 

They hurried along with all the speed they could make, 
and after a mile or two they saw the Last Bridge ahead, at 
the bottom of a short steep slope. They dreaded to see black 
figures waiting there, but they saw none. Strider made them 
take cover in a thicket at the side of the Road, while he went 
forward to explore. 

Before long he came hurrying back. ‘I can see no sign of 
the enemy,’ he said, ‘and I wonder very much what that 
means. But I have found something very strange.’ 

He held out his hand, and showed a single pale-green jewel. 
‘I found it in the mud in the middle of the Bridge,’ he said. 
‘It is a beryl, an elf-stone. Whether it was set there, or let fall 
by chance, I cannot say; but it brings hope to me. I will take 
it as a sign that we may pass the Bridge; but beyond that I 
dare not keep to the Road, without some clearer token.’ 


* * ok 


FLIGHT TO THE FORD 263 


At once they went on again. They crossed the Bridge in 
safety, hearing no sound but the water swirling against its 
three great arches. A mile further on they came to a narrow 
ravine that led away northwards through the steep lands on 
the left of the Road. Here Strider turned aside, and soon they 
were lost in a sombre country of dark trees winding among 
the feet of sullen hills. 

The hobbits were glad to leave the cheerless lands and 
the perilous Road behind them; but this new country seemed 
threatening and unfriendly. As they went forward the hills 
about them steadily rose. Here and there upon heights and 
ridges they caught glimpses of ancient walls of stone, and 
the ruins of towers: they had an ominous look. Frodo, who 
was not walking, had time to gaze ahead and to think. He 
recalled Bilbo’s account of his journey and the threatening 
towers on the hills north of the Road, in the country near 
the Trolls’ wood where his first serious adventure had 
happened. Frodo guessed that they were now in the same 
region, and wondered if by chance they would pass near 
the spot. 

‘Who lives in this land?’ he asked. ‘And who built these 
towers? Is this troll-country?’ 

‘No?’ said Strider. “Trolls do not build. No one lives in this 
land. Men once dwelt here, ages ago; but none remain now. 
They became an evil people, as legends tell, for they fell 
under the shadow of Angmar. But all were destroyed in the 
war that brought the North Kingdom to its end. But that is 
now so long ago that the hills have forgotten them, though a 
shadow still lies on the land.’ 

‘Where did you learn such tales, if all the land is empty 
and forgetful?’ asked Peregrin. “The birds and beasts do not 
tell tales of that sort.’ 

“The heirs of Elendil do not forget all things past,’ said 
Strider; ‘and many more things than I can tell are remem- 
bered in Rivendell.’ 

‘Have you often been to Rivendell?’ said Frodo. 

‘I have,’ said Strider. ‘I dwelt there once, and still I return 


264 THE FELLOWSHIP OF THE RING 


when I may. There my heart is; but it is not my fate to sit in 
peace, even in the fair house of Elrond.’ 


The hills now began to shut them in. The Road behind 
held on its way to the River Bruinen, but both were now 
hidden from view. The travellers came into a long valley; 
narrow, deeply cloven, dark and silent. Trees with old and 
twisted roots hung over cliffs, and piled up behind into 
mounting slopes of pine-wood. 

The hobbits grew very weary. They advanced slowly, for 
they had to pick their way through a pathless country, encum- 
bered by fallen trees and tumbled rocks. As long as they could 
they avoided climbing for Frodo’s sake, and because it was 
in fact difficult to find any way up out of the narrow dales. 
They had been two days in this country when the weather 
turned wet. The wind began to blow steadily out of the West 
and pour the water of the distant seas on the dark heads of 
the hills in fine drenching rain. By nightfall they were all 
soaked, and their camp was cheerless, for they could not get 
any fire to burn. The next day the hills rose still higher and 
steeper before them, and they were forced to turn away north- 
wards out of their course. Strider seemed to be getting anxi- 
ous: they were nearly ten days out from Weathertop, and 
their stock of provisions was beginning to run low. It went 
on raining. 

That night they camped on a stony shelf with a rock-wall 
behind them, in which there was a shallow cave, a mere scoop 
in the cliff. Frodo was restless. The cold and wet had made 
his wound more painful than ever, and the ache and sense of 
deadly chill took away all sleep. He lay tossing and turning 
and listening fearfully to the stealthy night-noises: wind in 
chinks of rock, water dripping, a crack, the sudden rattling 
fall of a loosened stone. He felt that black shapes were 
advancing to smother him; but when he sat up he saw nothing 
but the back of Strider sitting hunched up, smoking his pipe, 
and watching. He lay down again and passed into an uneasy 
dream, in which he walked on the grass in his garden in the 


FLIGHT TO THE FORD 265 


Shire, but it seemed faint and dim, less clear than the tall 
black shadows that stood looking over the hedge. 


In the morning he woke to find that the rain had stopped. 
The clouds were still thick, but they were breaking, and pale 
strips of blue appeared between them. The wind was shifting 
again. They did not start early. Immediately after their cold 
and comfortless breakfast Strider went off alone, telling the 
others to remain under the shelter of the cliff, until he came 
back. He was going to climb up, if he could, and get a look 
at the lie of the land. 

When he returned he was not reassuring. “We have come 
too far to the north,’ he said, ‘and we must find some way to 
turn back southwards again. If we keep on as we are going 
we shall get up into the Ettendales far north of Rivendell. 
That is troll-country, and little known to me. We could per- 
haps find our way through and come round to Rivendell 
from the north; but it would take too long, for I do not know 
the way, and our food would not last. So somehow or other 
we must find the Ford of Bruinen.’ 

The rest of that day they spent scrambling over rocky 
ground. They found a passage between two hills that led 
them into a valley running south-east, the direction that they 
wished to take; but towards the end of the day they found 
their road again barred by a ridge of high land; its dark edge 
against the sky was broken into many bare points like teeth 
of a blunted saw. They had a choice between going back or 
climbing over it. 

They decided to attempt the climb, but it proved very 
difficult. Before long Frodo was obliged to dismount and 
struggle along on foot. Even so they often despaired of getting 
their pony up, or indeed of finding a path for themselves, 
burdened as they were. The light was nearly gone, and they 
were all exhausted, when at last they reached the top. They 
had climbed on to a narrow saddle between two higher points, 
and the land fell steeply away again, only a short distance 
ahead. Frodo threw himself down, and lay on the ground 


266 THE FELLOWSHIP OF THE RING 


shivering. His left arm was lifeless, and his side and shoulder 
felt as if icy claws were laid upon them. The trees and rocks 
about him seemed shadowy and dim. 

‘We cannot go any further,’ said Merry to Strider. ‘I am 
afraid this has been too much for Frodo. I am dreadfully 
anxious about him. What are we to do? Do you think they 
will be able to cure him in Rivendell, if we ever get there?’ 

‘We shall see,’ answered Strider. “There is nothing more 
that I can do in the wilderness; and it is chiefly because of 
his wound that I am so anxious to press on. But I agree that 
we can go no further tonight.’ 

‘What is the matter with my master?’ asked Sam in a low 
voice, looking appealingly at Strider. “His wound was small, 
and it is already closed. There’s nothing to be seen but a cold 
white mark on his shoulder.’ 

‘Frodo has been touched by the weapons of the Enemy,’ 
said Strider, ‘and there is some poison or evil at work that 
is beyond my skill to drive out. But do not give up hope, 
Sam!’ 


Night was cold up on the high ridge. They lit a small fire 
down under the gnarled roots of an old pine, that hung over 
a shallow pit: it looked as if stone had once been quarried 
there. They sat huddled together. The wind blew chill 
through the pass, and they heard the tree-tops lower down 
moaning and sighing. Frodo lay half in a dream, imagining 
that endless dark wings were sweeping by above him, and 
that on the wings rode pursuers that sought him in all the 
hollows of the hills. 

The morning dawned bright and fair; the air was clean, 
and the light pale and clear in a rain-washed sky. Their hearts 
were encouraged, but they longed for the sun to warm their 
cold stiff limbs. As soon as it was light, Strider took Merry 
with him and went to survey the country from the height to 
the east of the pass. The sun had risen and was shining 
brightly when he returned with more comforting news. They 
were now going more or less in the right direction. If they 


FLIGHT TO THE FORD 267 


went on, down the further side of the ridge, they would 
have the Mountains on their left. Some way ahead Strider 
had caught a glimpse of the Loudwater again, and he knew 
that, though it was hidden from view, the Road to the Ford 
was not far from the River and lay on the side nearest to 
them. 

‘We must make for the Road again,’ he said. ‘We cannot 
hope to find a path through these hills. Whatever danger may 
beset it, the Road is our only way to the Ford.’ 


As soon as they had eaten they set out again. They climbed 
slowly down the southern side of the ridge; but the way was 
much easier than they had expected, for the slope was far 
less steep on this side, and before long Frodo was able to 
ride again. Bill Ferny’s poor old pony was developing an 
unexpected talent for picking out a path, and for sparing its 
rider as many jolts as possible. The spirits of the party rose 
again. Even Frodo felt better in the morning light, but every 
now and again a mist seemed to obscure his sight, and he 
passed his hands over his eyes. 

Pippin was a little ahead of the others. Suddenly he turned 
round and called to them. “There is a path here!’ he cried. 

When they came up with him, they saw that he had made 
no mistake: there were clearly the beginnings of a path, that 
climbed with many windings out of the woods below and 
faded away on the hill-top behind. In places it was now faint 
and overgrown, or choked with fallen stones and trees; but 
at one time it seemed to have been much used. It was a path 
made by strong arms and heavy feet. Here and there old trees 
had been cut or broken down, and large rocks cloven or 
heaved aside to make a way. 

They followed the track for some while, for it offered much 
the easiest way down, but they went cautiously, and their 
anxiety increased as they came into the dark woods, and the 
path grew plainer and broader. Suddenly coming out of a 
belt of fir-trees it ran steeply down a slope, and turned sharply 
to the left round the corner of a rocky shoulder of the hill. 


268 THE FELLOWSHIP OF THE RING 


When they came to the corner they looked round and saw 
that the path ran on over a level strip under the face of a low 
cliff overhung with trees. In the stony wall there was a door 
hanging crookedly ajar upon one great hinge. 

Outside the door they all halted. There was a cave or 
rock-chamber behind, but in the gloom inside nothing could 
be seen. Strider, Sam, and Merry pushing with all their 
strength managed to open the door a little wider, and then 
Strider and Merry went in. They did not go far, for on the 
floor lay many old bones, and nothing else was to be seen 
near the entrance except some great empty jars and broken 
pots. 

‘Surely this is a troll-hole, if ever there was one!’ said 
Pippin. ‘Come out, you two, and let us get away. Now we 
know who made the path — and we had better get off it quick.’ 

“There is no need, I think,’ said Strider, coming out. ‘It is 
certainly a troll-hole, but it seems to have been long forsaken. 
I don’t think we need be afraid. But let us go on down warily, 
and we shall see.’ 

The path went on again from the door, and turning to the 
right again across the level space plunged down a thick 
wooded slope. Pippin, not liking to show Strider that he was 
still afraid, went on ahead with Merry. Sam and Strider came 
behind, one on each side of Frodo’s pony, for the path was 
now broad enough for four or five hobbits to walk abreast. 
But they had not gone very far before Pippin came running 
back, followed by Merry. They both looked terrified. 

“There are trolls!’ Pippin panted. ‘Down in a clearing in 
the woods not far below. We got a sight of them through the 
tree-trunks. They are very large!’ 

‘We will come and look at them,’ said Strider, picking up 
a stick. Frodo said nothing, but Sam looked scared. 


The sun was now high, and it shone down through the 
half-stripped branches of the trees, and lit the clearing with 
bright patches of light. They halted suddenly on the edge, 
and peered through the tree-trunks, holding their breath. 


FLIGHT TO THE FORD 269 


There stood the trolls: three large trolls. One was stooping, 
and the other two stood staring at him. 

Strider walked forward unconcernedly. ‘Get up, old stone!’ 
he said, and broke his stick upon the stooping troll. 

Nothing happened. There was a gasp of astonishment 
from the hobbits, and then even Frodo laughed. ‘Well!’ he 
said. ‘We are forgetting our family history! These must be 
the very three that were caught by Gandalf, quarrelling over 
the right way to cook thirteen dwarves and one hobbit.’ 

‘I had no idea we were anywhere near the place!’ said 
Pippin. He knew the story well. Bilbo and Frodo had told it 
often; but as a matter of fact he had never more than half 
believed it. Even now he looked at the stone trolls with sus- 
picion, wondering if some magic might not suddenly bring 
them to life again. 

“You are forgetting not only your family history, but all 
you ever knew about trolls,’ said Strider. ‘It is broad daylight 
with a bright sun, and yet you come back trying to scare me 
with a tale of live trolls waiting for us in this glade! In any 
case you might have noticed that one of them has an old 
bird’s nest behind his ear. That would be a most unusual 
ornament for a live troll!’ 

They all laughed. Frodo felt his spirits reviving: the re- 
minder of Bilbo’s first successful adventure was heartening. 
The sun, too, was warm and comforting, and the mist before 
his eyes seemed to be lifting a little. They rested for some 
time in the glade, and took their mid-day meal right under 
the shadow of the trolls’ large legs. 

‘Won’t somebody give us a bit of a song, while the sun is 
high?’ said Merry, when they had finished. “We haven’t had 
a song or a tale for days.’ 

‘Not since Weathertop,’ said Frodo. The others looked at 
him. ‘Don’t worry about me!’ he added. ‘I feel much better, 
but I don’t think I could sing. Perhaps Sam could dig some- 
thing out of his memory.’ 

“Come on, Sam!’ said Merry. “There’s more stored in your 
head than you let on about.’ 


270 THE FELLOWSHIP OF THE RING 


‘I don’t know about that,’ said Sam. ‘But how would this 
suit? It ain’t what I call proper poetry, if you understand me: 
just a bit of nonsense. But these old images here brought it 
to my mind.’ Standing up, with his hands behind his back, 
as if he was at school, he began to sing to an old tune. 


Troll sat alone on his seat of stone, 
And munched and mumbled a bare old bone; 
For many a year he had gnawed it near, 
For meat was hard to come by. 
Done by! Gum by! 
In a cave in the hills he dwelt alone, 
And meat was hard to come by. 


Up came Tom with his big boots on. 
Said he to Troll: ‘Pray, what ts yon? 
For it looks like the shin o? my nuncle Tim, 
As should be a-lyin’ in graveyard. 
Caveyard! Paveyard! 
This many a year has Tim been gone, 
And I thought he were lyin’ in graveyard.’ 


‘My lad,’ said Troll, ‘this bone I stole. 
But what be bones that lie in a hole? 
Thy nuncle was dead as a lump o° lead, 
Afore I found his shinbone. 
Tinbone! Thinbone! 
He can spare a share for a poor old troll, 
For he don’t need his shinbone.’ 


Said Tom: ‘T don’t see why the likes o’ thee 
Without axin’ leave should go makin’ free 
With the shank or the shin o’ my father’s kin; 
So hand the old bone over! 
Rover! Trover! 
Though dead he be, it belongs to he; 
So hand the old bone over!’ 


FLIGHT TO THE FORD 271 


‘For a couple o’ pins,’ says Troll, and grins, 
Tl eat thee too, and gnaw thy shins. 
A bit o° fresh meat will go down sweet! 
I'll try my teeth on thee now. 
Hee now! See now! 
I'm tired o° gnawing old bones and skins; 
Pve a mind to dine on thee now.’ 


But just as he thought his dinner was caught, 
He found his hands had hold of naught. 
Before he could mind, Tom slipped behind 
And gave him the boot to larn him. 
Warn him! Darn him! 
A bump o’ the boot on the seat, Tom thought, 
Would be the way to larn him. 


But harder than stone 1s the flesh and bone 
Of a troll that sits in the hills alone. 
As well set your boot to the mountain’s root, 
For the seat of a troll don’t feel it. 
Peel it! Heal it! 
Old Troll laughed, when he heard Tom groan, 
And he knew his toes could feel tt. 


Tom’s leg 1s game, since home he came, 
And his bootless foot is lasting lame; 
But Troll don’t care, and he’s still there 
With the bone he boned from its owner. 
Doner! Boner! 
Troll’s old seat is still the same, 
And the bone he boned from its owner! 


‘Well, that’s a warning to us all!’ laughed Merry. ‘It is as 
well you used a stick, and not your hand, Strider!’ 

‘Where did you come by that, Sam?’ asked Pippin. ‘I’ve 
never heard those words before.’ 

Sam muttered something inaudible. ‘It’s out of his own 


272 THE FELLOWSHIP OF THE RING 


head, of course,’ said Frodo. ‘I am learning a lot about Sam 

Gamgee on this journey. First he was a conspirator, now he’s 

a jester. Hell end up by becoming a wizard — or a warrior!’ 
‘I hope not,’ said Sam. ‘I don’t want to be neither!’ 


In the afternoon they went on down the woods. They were 
probably following the very track that Gandalf, Bilbo, and 
the dwarves had used many years before. After a few miles 
they came out on the top of a high bank above the Road. At 
this point the Road had left the Hoarwell far behind in its 
narrow valley, and now clung close to the feet of the hills, 
rolling and winding eastward among woods and heather- 
covered slopes towards the Ford and the Mountains. Not far 
down the bank Strider pointed out a stone in the grass. On 
it roughly cut and now much weathered could still be seen 
dwarf-runes and secret marks. 

“There! said Merry. “That must be the stone that marked 
the place where the trolls’ gold was hidden. How much is left 
of Bilbo’s share, I wonder, Frodo?’ 

Frodo looked at the stone, and wished that Bilbo had 
brought home no treasure more perilous, nor less easy to part 
with. ‘None at all,’ he said. ‘Bilbo gave it all away. He told 
me he did not feel it was really his, as it came from robbers.’ 


The Road lay quiet under the long shadows of early 
evening. There was no sign of any other travellers to be seen. 
As there was now no other possible course for them to take, 
they climbed down the bank, and turning left went off as fast 
as they could. Soon a shoulder of the hills cut off the light of 
the fast westering sun. A cold wind flowed down to meet 
them from the mountains ahead. 

They were beginning to look out for a place off the Road, 
where they could camp for the night, when they heard a 
sound that brought sudden fear back into their hearts: the 
noise of hoofs behind them. They looked back, but they could 
not see far because of the many windings and rollings of the 
Road. As quickly as they could they scrambled off the beaten 


FLIGHT TO THE FORD 273 


way and up into the deep heather and bilberry brushwood 
on the slopes above, until they came to a small patch of 
thick-growing hazels. As they peered out from among the 
bushes, they could see the Road, faint and grey in the failing 
light, some thirty feet below them. The sound of hoofs drew 
nearer. They were going fast, with a light clhippety-chppety-clip. 
Then faintly, as if it was blown away from them by the breeze, 
they seemed to catch a dim ringing, as of small bells tinkling. 

“That does not sound like a Black Rider’s horse!’ said 
Frodo, listening intently. The other hobbits agreed hopefully 
that it did not, but they all remained full of suspicion. They 
had been in fear of pursuit for so long that any sound from 
behind seemed ominous and unfriendly. But Strider was now 
leaning forward, stooped to the ground, with a hand to his 
ear, and a look of joy on his face. 

The light faded, and the leaves on the bushes rustled softly. 
Clearer and nearer now the bells jingled, and chppety-clip 
came the quick trotting feet. Suddenly into view below came 
a white horse, gleaming in the shadows, running swiftly. In 
the dusk its headstall flickered and flashed, as if it were stud- 
ded with gems like living stars. The rider’s cloak streamed 
behind him, and his hood was thrown back; his golden hair 
flowed shimmering in the wind of his speed. To Frodo it 
appeared that a white light was shining through the form and 
raiment of the rider, as if through a thin veil. 

Strider sprang from hiding and dashed down towards the 
Road, leaping with a cry through the heather; but even before 
he had moved or called, the rider had reined in his horse and 
halted, looking up towards the thicket where they stood. 
When he saw Strider, he dismounted and ran to meet him 
calling out: Az na vedui Dunadan! Mae govannen! His speech 
and clear ringing voice left no doubt in their hearts: the rider 
was of the Elven-folk. No others that dwelt in the wide world 
had voices so fair to hear. But there seemed to be a note of 
haste or fear in his call, and they saw that he was now speaking 
quickly and urgently to Strider. 

Soon Strider beckoned to them, and the hobbits left the 


274 THE FELLOWSHIP OF THE RING 


bushes and hurried down to the Road. “This is Glorfindel, 
who dwells in the house of Elrond,’ said Strider. 

“Hail, and well met at last!’ said the Elf-lord to Frodo. ‘I 
was sent from Rivendell to look for you. We feared that you 
were in danger upon the road.’ 

“Then Gandalf has reached Rivendell?’ cried Frodo 
joyfully. 

‘No. He had not when I departed; but that was nine days 
ago, answered Glorfindel. ‘Elrond received news that 
troubled him. Some of my kindred, journeying in your land 
beyond the Baranduin,* learned that things were amiss, and 
sent messages as swiftly as they could. They said that the 
Nine were abroad, and that you were astray bearing a great 
burden without guidance, for Gandalf had not returned. 
There are few even in Rivendell that can ride openly against 
the Nine; but such as there were, Elrond sent out north, west, 
and south. It was thought that you might turn far aside to 
avoid pursuit, and become lost in the Wilderness. 

‘It was my lot to take the Road, and I came to the Bridge 
of Mitheithel, and left a token there, nigh on seven days ago. 
Three of the servants of Sauron were upon the Bridge, but 
they withdrew and I pursued them westward. I came also 
upon two others, but they turned away southward. Since then 
I have searched for your trail. Two days ago I found it, and 
followed it over the Bridge; and today I marked where you 
descended from the hills again. But come! There is no time 
for further news. Since you are here we must risk the peril of 
the Road and go. There are five behind us, and when they 
find your trail upon the Road they will ride after us like the 
wind. And they are not all. Where the other four may be, I 
do not know. I fear that we may find the Ford is already held 
against us.’ 

While Glorfindel was speaking the shades of evening deep- 
ened. Frodo felt a great weariness come over him. Ever since 
the sun began to sink the mist before his eyes had darkened, 


* The Brandywine River. 


FLIGHT TO THE FORD 275 


and he felt that a shadow was coming between him and the 
faces of his friends. Now pain assailed him, and he felt cold. 
He swayed, clutching at Sam’s arm. 

‘My master is sick and wounded,’ said Sam angrily. ‘He 
can’t go on riding after nightfall. He needs rest.’ 

Glorfindel caught Frodo as he sank to the ground, and 
taking him gently in his arms he looked in his face with grave 
anxiety. 

Briefly Strider told of the attack on their camp under 
Weathertop, and of the deadly knife. He drew out the hilt, 
which he had kept, and handed it to the Elf. Glorfindel 
shuddered as he took it, but he looked intently at it. 

“There are evil things written on this hilt,’ he said; ‘though 
maybe your eyes cannot see them. Keep it, Aragorn, till we 
reach the house of Elrond! But be wary, and handle it as little 
as you may! Alas! the wounds of this weapon are beyond my 
skill to heal. I will do what I can — but all the more do I urge 
you now to go on without rest.’ 

He searched the wound on Frodo’s shoulder with his 
fingers, and his face grew graver, as if what he learned dis- 
quieted him. But Frodo felt the chill lessen in his side and 
arm; a little warmth crept down from his shoulder to his 
hand, and the pain grew easier. The dusk of evening seemed 
to grow lighter about him, as if a cloud had been withdrawn. 
He saw his friends’ faces more clearly again, and a measure 
of new hope and strength returned. 

“You shall ride my horse,’ said Glorfindel. ‘I will shorten 
the stirrups up to the saddle-skirts, and you must sit as tight 
as you can. But you need not fear: my horse will not let any 
rider fall that I command him to bear. His pace is light and 
smooth; and if danger presses too near, he will bear you away 
with a speed that even the black steeds of the enemy cannot 
rival.’ 

‘No, he will not!’ said Frodo. ‘I shall not ride him, if I am 
to be carried off to Rivendell or anywhere else, leaving my 
friends behind in danger.’ 

Glorfindel smiled. ‘I doubt very much,’ he said, ‘if your 


276 THE FELLOWSHIP OF THE RING 


friends would be in danger if you were not with them! The 
pursuit would follow you and leave us in peace, I think. It is 
you, Frodo, and that which you bear that brings us all in 
peril.’ 


To that Frodo had no answer, and he was persuaded to 
mount Glorfindel’s white horse. The pony was laden instead 
with a great part of the others’ burdens, so that they now 
marched lighter, and for a time made good speed; but the 
hobbits began to find it hard to keep up with the swift tireless 
feet of the Elf. On he led them, into the mouth of darkness, 
and still on under the deep clouded night. There was neither 
star nor moon. Not until the grey of dawn did he allow them 
to halt. Pippin, Merry, and Sam were by that time nearly 
asleep on their stumbling legs; and even Strider seemed by 
the sag of his shoulders to be weary. Frodo sat upon the horse 
in a dark dream. 

They cast themselves down in the heather a few yards 
from the road-side, and fell asleep immediately. They seemed 
hardly to have closed their eyes when Glorfindel, who had 
set himself to watch while they slept, awoke them again. The 
sun had now climbed far into the morning, and the clouds 
and mists of the night were gone. 

‘Drink this!’ said Glorfindel to them, pouring for each in 
turn a little liquor from his silver-studded flask of leather. It 
was clear as spring water and had no taste, and it did not feel 
either cool or warm in the mouth; but strength and vigour 
seemed to flow into all their limbs as they drank it. Eaten 
after that draught the stale bread and dried fruit (which was 
now all that they had left) seemed to satisfy their hunger 
better than many a good breakfast in the Shire had done. 


They had rested rather less than five hours when they took 
to the Road again. Glorfindel still urged them on, and only 
allowed two brief halts during the day’s march. In this way 
they covered almost twenty miles before nightfall, and came 
to a point where the Road bent right and ran down towards 


FLIGHT TO THE FORD 277 


the bottom of the valley, now making straight for the Bruinen. 
So far there had been no sign or sound of pursuit that the 
hobbits could see or hear; but often Glorfindel would halt 
and listen for a moment, if they lagged behind, and a look of 
anxiety clouded his face. Once or twice he spoke to Strider 
in the elf-tongue. 

But however anxious their guides might be, it was plain 
that the hobbits could go no further that night. They were 
stumbling along dizzy with weariness, and unable to think of 
anything but their feet and legs. Frodo’s pain had redoubled, 
and during the day things about him faded to shadows of 
ghostly grey. He almost welcomed the coming of night, for 
then the world seemed less pale and empty. 


The hobbits were still weary, when they set out again early 
next morning. There were many miles yet to go between 
them and the Ford, and they hobbled forward at the best 
pace they could manage. 

‘Our peril will be greatest just ere we reach the river,’ said 
Glorfindel; ‘for my heart warns me that the pursuit is now 
swift behind us, and other danger may be waiting by the 
Ford.’ 

The Road was still running steadily downhill, and there 
was now in places much grass at either side, in which the 
hobbits walked when they could, to ease their tired feet. In 
the late afternoon they came to a place where the Road went 
suddenly under the dark shadow of tall pine-trees, and then 
plunged into a deep cutting with steep moist walls of red 
stone. Echoes ran along as they hurried forward; and there 
seemed to be a sound of many footfalls following their own. 
All at once, as if through a gate of light, the Road ran out 
again from the end of the tunnel into the open. There at the 
bottom of a sharp incline they saw before them a long flat 
mile, and beyond that the Ford of Rivendell. On the further 
side was a steep brown bank, threaded by a winding path; 
and behind that the tall mountains climbed, shoulder above 
shoulder, and peak beyond peak, into the fading sky. 


278 THE FELLOWSHIP OF THE RING 


There was still an echo as of following feet in the cutting 
behind them; a rushing noise as if a wind were rising and 
pouring through the branches of the pines. One moment 
Glorfindel turned and listened, then he sprang forward with 
a loud cry. 

‘Fly!’ he called. ‘Fly! The enemy is upon us!’ 

The white horse leaped forward. The hobbits ran down 
the slope. Glorfindel and Strider followed as rearguard. They 
were only half way across the flat, when suddenly there was 
a noise of horses galloping. Out of the gate in the trees that 
they had just left rode a Black Rider. He reined his horse in, 
and halted, swaying in his saddle. Another followed him, and 
then another; then again two more. 

‘Ride forward! Ride!’ cried Glorfindel to Frodo. 

He did not obey at once, for a strange reluctance seized 
him. Checking the horse to a walk, he turned and looked 
back. The Riders seemed to sit upon their great steeds like 
threatening statues upon a hill, dark and solid, while all the 
woods and land about them receded as if into a mist. Sud- 
denly he knew in his heart that they were silently command- 
ing him to wait. Then at once fear and hatred awoke in him. 
His hand left the bridle and gripped the hilt of his sword, and 
with a red flash he drew it. 

‘Ride on! Ride on!’ cried Glorfindel, and then loud and 
clear he called to the horse in the elf-tongue: noro lim, noro 
lim, Asfaloth! 

At once the white horse sprang away and sped like the 
wind along the last lap of the Road. At the same moment the 
black horses leaped down the hill in pursuit, and from 
the Riders came a terrible cry, such as Frodo had heard filling 
the woods with horror in the Eastfarthing far away. It was 
answered; and to the dismay of Frodo and his friends out 
from the trees and rocks away on the left four other Riders 
came flying. Two rode towards Frodo; two galloped madly 
towards the Ford to cut off his escape. They seemed to him 
to run like the wind and to grow swiftly larger and darker, as 
their courses converged with his. 


FLIGHT TO THE FORD 279 


Frodo looked back for a moment over his shoulder. He 
could no longer see his friends. The Riders behind were 
falling back: even their great steeds were no match in speed 
for the white elf-horse of Glorfindel. He looked forward 
again, and hope faded. There seemed no chance of reaching 
the Ford before he was cut off by the others that had lain in 
ambush. He could see them clearly now: they appeared to 
have cast aside their hoods and black cloaks, and they were 
robed in white and grey. Swords were naked in their pale 
hands; helms were on their heads. Their cold eyes glittered, 
and they called to him with fell voices. 

Fear now filled all Frodo’s mind. He thought no longer of 
his sword. No cry came from him. He shut his eyes and clung 
to the horse’s mane. The wind whistled in his ears, and the 
bells upon the harness rang wild and shrill. A breath of deadly 
cold pierced him like a spear, as with a last spurt, like a flash 
of white fire, the elf-horse speeding as if on wings, passed 
right before the face of the foremost Rider. 

Frodo heard the splash of water. It foamed about his feet. 
He felt the quick heave and surge as the horse left the river 
and struggled up the stony path. He was climbing the steep 
bank. He was across the Ford. 

But the pursuers were close behind. At the top of the 
bank the horse halted and turned about neighing fiercely. 
There were Nine Riders at the water’s edge below, and 
Frodo’s spirit quailed before the threat of their uplifted faces. 
He knew of nothing that would prevent them from crossing 
as easily as he had done; and he felt that it was useless to 
try to escape over the long uncertain path from the Ford to 
the edge of Rivendell, if once the Riders crossed. In any 
case he felt that he was commanded urgently to halt. Hatred 
again stirred in him, but he had no longer the strength to 
refuse. 

Suddenly the foremost Rider spurred his horse forward. It 
checked at the water and reared up. With a great effort Frodo 
sat upright and brandished his sword. 

‘Go back!’ he cried. ‘Go back to the Land of Mordor, and 


280 THE FELLOWSHIP OF THE RING 


follow me no more!’ His voice sounded thin and shrill in his 
own ears. The Riders halted, but Frodo had not the power 
of Bombadil. His enemies laughed at him with a harsh and 
chilling laughter. ‘Come back! Come back!’ they called. “To 
Mordor we will take you!’ 

‘Go back!’ he whispered. 

“The Ring! The Ring! they cried with deadly voices; and 
immediately their leader urged his horse forward into the 
water, followed closely by two others. 

‘By Elbereth and Luthien the Fair,’ said Frodo with a last 
effort, lifting up his sword, ‘you shall have neither the Ring 
nor me!’ 

Then the leader, who was now half across the Ford, stood 
up menacing in his stirrups, and raised up his hand. Frodo 
was stricken dumb. He felt his tongue cleave to his mouth, 
and his heart labouring. His sword broke and fell out of 
his shaking hand. The elf-horse reared and snorted. The 
foremost of the black horses had almost set foot upon the 
shore. 

At that moment there came a roaring and a rushing: a noise 
of loud waters rolling many stones. Dimly Frodo saw the 
river below him rise, and down along its course there came a 
plumed cavalry of waves. White flames seemed to Frodo to 
flicker on their crests, and he half fancied that he saw amid 
the water white riders upon white horses with frothing 
manes. The three Riders that were still in the midst of the 
Ford were overwhelmed: they disappeared, buried suddenly 
under angry foam. Those that were behind drew back in 
dismay. 

With his last failing senses Frodo heard cries, and it seemed 
to him that he saw, beyond the Riders that hesitated on the 
shore, a shining figure of white light; and behind it ran small 
shadowy forms waving flames, that flared red in the grey mist 
that was falling over the world. 

The black horses were filled with madness, and leaping 
forward in terror they bore their riders into the rushing flood. 
Their piercing cries were drowned in the roaring of the river 


FLIGHT TO THE FORD 281 


as it carried them away. Then Frodo felt himself falling, and 
the roaring and confusion seemed to rise and engulf him 
together with his enemies. He heard and saw no more. 


BOOK TWO 


Chapter 1 


MANY MEETINGS 


Frodo woke and found himself lying in bed. At first he 
thought that he had slept late, after a long unpleasant dream 
that still hovered on the edge of memory. Or perhaps he had 
been ill? But the ceiling looked strange; it was flat, and it had 
dark beams richly carved. He lay a little while longer looking 
at patches of sunlight on the wall, and listening to the sound 
of a waterfall. 

‘Where am I, and what is the time?’ he said aloud to the 
ceiling. 

‘In the house of Elrond, and it is ten o’clock in the morn- 
ing,’ said a voice. ‘It is the morning of October the twenty- 
fourth, if you want to know.’ 

‘Gandalf!’ cried Frodo, sitting up. There was the old wizard, 
sitting in a chair by the open window. 

‘Yes,’ he said, ‘I am here. And you are lucky to be here, 
too, after all the absurd things you have done since you left 
home.’ 

Frodo lay down again. He felt too comfortable and peaceful 
to argue, and in any case he did not think he would get the 
better of an argument. He was fully awake now, and the 
memory of his journey was returning: the disastrous ‘short 
cut? through the Old Forest; the ‘accident’ at The Prancing 
Pony; and his madness in putting on the Ring in the dell 
under Weathertop. While he was thinking of all these things 
and trying in vain to bring his memory down to his arriving 
in Rivendell, there was a long silence, broken only by the soft 
puffs of Gandalf’s pipe, as he blew white smoke-rings out of 
the window. 

‘Where’s Sam?’ Frodo asked at length. ‘And are the others 
all right?’ 


286 THE FELLOWSHIP OF THE RING 


“Yes, they are all safe and sound,’ answered Gandalf. ‘Sam 
was here until I sent him off to get some rest, about half an 
hour ago.’ 

‘What happened at the Ford?’ said Frodo. ‘It all seemed 
so dim, somehow; and it still does.’ 

‘Yes, it would. You were beginning to fade,’ answered 
Gandalf. “The wound was overcoming you at last. A few 
more hours and you would have been beyond our aid. But 
you have some strength in you, my dear hobbit! As you 
showed in the Barrow. That was touch and go: perhaps the 
most dangerous moment of all. I wish you could have held 
out at Weathertop.’ 

“You seem to know a great deal already,” said Frodo. ‘I 
have not spoken to the others about the Barrow. At first it 
was too horrible, and afterwards there were other things to 
think about. How do you know about it?’ 

“You have talked long in your sleep, Frodo,’ said Gandalf 
gently, ‘and it has not been hard for me to read your mind 
and memory. Do not worry! Though I said ‘‘absurd’’ just 
now, I did not mean it. I think well of you — and of the others. 
It is no small feat to have come so far, and through such 
dangers, still bearing the Ring.’ 

‘We should never have done it without Strider,’ said Frodo. 
‘But we needed you. I did not know what to do without you.’ 

‘I was delayed,’ said Gandalf, ‘and that nearly proved our 
ruin. And yet I am not sure: it may have been better so.’ 

‘I wish you would tell me what happened!’ 

‘All in good time! You are not supposed to talk or worry 
about anything today, by Elrond’s orders.’ 

‘But talking would stop me thinking and wondering, which 
are quite as tiring,’ said Frodo. ‘I am wide awake now, and I 
remember so many things that want explaining. Why were 
you delayed? You ought to tell me that at least.’ 

“You will soon hear all you wish to know,’ said Gandalf. 
‘We shall have a Council, as soon as you are well enough. At 
the moment I will only say that I was held captive.’ 

‘You?’ cried Frodo. 


MANY MEETINGS 287 


‘Yes, I, Gandalf the Grey,’ said the wizard solemnly. 
“There are many powers in the world, for good or for evil. 
Some are greater than I am. Against some I have not yet been 
measured. But my time is coming. The Morgul-lord and his 
Black Riders have come forth. War is preparing!’ 

“Then you knew of the Riders already — before I met them?’ 

“Yes, I knew of them. Indeed I spoke of them once to you; 
for the Black Riders are the Ringwraiths, the Nine Servants 
of the Lord of the Rings. But I did not know that they had 
arisen again or I should have fled with you at once. I heard 
news of them only after I left you in June; but that story must 
wait. For the moment we have been saved from disaster, by 
Aragorn.’ 

‘Yes,’ said Frodo, ‘it was Strider that saved us. Yet I was 
afraid of him at first. Sam never quite trusted him, I think, 
not at any rate until we met Glorfindel.’ 

Gandalf smiled. ‘I have heard all about Sam,’ he said. ‘He 
has no more doubts now.’ 

‘I am glad,’ said Frodo. ‘For I have become very fond of 
Strider. Well, fond is not the right word. I mean he is dear to 
me; though he is strange, and grim at times. In fact, he 
reminds me often of you. I didn’t know that any of the Big 
People were like that. I thought, well, that they were just big, 
and rather stupid: kind and stupid like Butterbur; or stupid 
and wicked like Bill Ferny. But then we don’t know much 
about Men in the Shire, except perhaps the Bree-landers..’ 

“You don’t know much even about them, if you think old 
Barliman is stupid,’ said Gandalf. ‘He is wise enough on his 
own ground. He thinks less than he talks, and slower; yet he 
can see through a brick wall in time (as they say in Bree). 
But there are few left in Middle-earth like Aragorn son of 
Arathorn. The race of the Kings from over the Sea is nearly 
at an end. It may be that this War of the Ring will be their 
last adventure.’ 

‘Do you really mean that Strider is one of the people of 
the old Kings?’ said Frodo in wonder. ‘I thought they had all 
vanished long ago. I thought he was only a Ranger.’ 


288 THE FELLOWSHIP OF THE RING 


‘Only a Ranger!’ cried Gandalf. ‘My dear Frodo, that is 
just what the Rangers are: the last remnant in the North of 
the great people, the Men of the West. They have helped me 
before; and I shall need their help in the days to come; for 
we have reached Rivendell, but the Ring is not yet at rest.’ 

‘I suppose not,’ said Frodo. ‘But so far my only thought 
has been to get here; and I hope I shan’t have to go any 
further. It is very pleasant just to rest. I have had a month of 
exile and adventure, and I find that has been as much as I 
want.’ 

He fell silent and shut his eyes. After a while he spoke 
again. ‘I have been reckoning,’ he said, ‘and I can’t bring 
the total up to October the twenty-fourth. It ought to be 
the twenty-first. We must have reached the Ford by the 
twentieth.’ 

“You have talked and reckoned more than is good for you,’ 
said Gandalf. ‘How do the side and shoulder feel now?’ 

‘I don’t know,’ Frodo answered. “They don’t feel at all: 
which is an improvement, but’ — he made an effort — ‘I can 
move my arm again a little. Yes, it is coming back to life. It 
is not cold,’ he added, touching his left hand with his right. 

‘Good!’ said Gandalf. ‘It is mending fast. You will soon be 
sound again. Elrond has cured you: he has tended you for 
days, ever since you were brought in.’ 

‘Days?’ said Frodo. 

‘Well, four nights and three days, to be exact. The Elves 
brought you from the Ford on the night of the twentieth, and 
that is where you lost count. We have been terribly anxious, 
and Sam has hardly left your side, day or night, except to 
run messages. Elrond is a master of healing, but the weapons 
of our Enemy are deadly. To tell you the truth, I had very 
little hope; for I suspected that there was some fragment of 
the blade still in the closed wound. But it could not be found 
until last night. Then Elrond removed a splinter. It was deeply 
buried, and it was working inwards.’ 

Frodo shuddered, remembering the cruel knife with 
notched blade that had vanished in Strider’s hands. ‘Don’t 


MANY MEETINGS 289 


be alarmed!’ said Gandalf. ‘It is gone now. It has been melted. 
And it seems that Hobbits fade very reluctantly. I have known 
strong warriors of the Big People who would quickly have 
been overcome by that splinter, which you bore for seventeen 
days.’ 

‘What would they have done to me?’ asked Frodo. ‘What 
were the Riders trying to do?’ 

“They tried to pierce your heart with a Morgul-knife which 
remains in the wound. If they had succeeded, you would 
have become like they are, only weaker and under their com- 
mand. You would have become a wraith under the dominion 
of the Dark Lord; and he would have tormented you for 
trying to keep his Ring, if any greater torment were possible 
than being robbed of it and seeing it on his hand.’ 

“Thank goodness I did not realize the horrible danger!’ said 
Frodo faintly. ‘I was mortally afraid, of course; but if I had 
known more, I should not have dared even to move. It is a 
marvel that I escaped!’ 

“Yes, fortune or fate have helped you,’ said Gandalf, ‘not 
to mention courage. For your heart was not touched, and 
only your shoulder was pierced; and that was because you 
resisted to the last. But it was a terribly narrow shave, so to 
speak. You were in gravest peril while you wore the Ring, for 
then you were half in the wraith-world yourself, and they 
might have seized you. You could see them, and they could 
see you.’ 

‘I know,’ said Frodo. “They were terrible to behold! But 
why could we all see their horses?’ 

‘Because they are real horses; just as the black robes are 
real robes that they wear to give shape to their nothingness 
when they have dealings with the living.’ 

“Then why do these black horses endure such riders? All 
other animals are terrified when they draw near, even the 
elf-horse of Glorfindel. The dogs howl and the geese scream 
at them.’ 

‘Because these horses are born and bred to the service of 
the Dark Lord in Mordor. Not all his servants and chattels 


290 THE FELLOWSHIP OF THE RING 


are wraiths! There are orcs and trolls, there are wargs and 
werewolves; and there have been and still are many Men, 
warriors and kings, that walk alive under the Sun, and yet are 
under his sway. And their number is growing daily.’ 

‘What about Rivendell and the Elves? Is Rivendell safe?’ 

“Yes, at present, until all else is conquered. The Elves may 
fear the Dark Lord, and they may fly before him, but never 
again will they listen to him or serve him. And here in Riven- 
dell there live still some of his chief foes: the Elven-wise, lords 
of the Eldar from beyond the furthest seas. They do not fear 
the Ringwraiths, for those who have dwelt in the Blessed 
Realm live at once in both worlds, and against both the Seen 
and the Unseen they have great power.’ 

‘T thought that I saw a white figure that shone and did not 
grow dim like the others. Was that Glorfindel then?’ 

“Yes, you saw him for a moment as he is upon the other 
side: one of the mighty of the Firstborn. He is an Elf-lord of 
a house of princes. Indeed there is a power in Rivendell to 
withstand the might of Mordor, for a while: and elsewhere 
other powers still dwell. There is power, too, of another kind 
in the Shire. But all such places will soon become islands 
under siege, if things go on as they are going. The Dark Lord 
is putting forth all his strength. 

‘Still,’ he said, standing suddenly up and sticking out his 
chin, while his beard went stiff and straight like bristling wire, 
‘we must keep up our courage. You will soon be well, if I do 
not talk you to death. You are in Rivendell, and you need 
not worry about anything for the present.’ 

‘I haven’t any courage to keep up,’ said Frodo, ‘but I am 
not worried at the moment. Just give me news of my friends, 
and tell me the end of the affair at the Ford, as I keep on 
asking, and I shall be content for the present. After that I 
shall have another sleep, I think; but I shan’t be able to close 
my eyes until you have finished the story for me.’ 

Gandalf moved his chair to the bedside and took a good 
look at Frodo. The colour had come back to his face, and his 
eyes were clear, and fully awake and aware. He was smiling, 


MANY MEETINGS 291 


and there seemed to be little wrong with him. But to the 
wizard’s eye there was a faint change, just a hint as it were of 
transparency, about him, and especially about the left hand 
that lay outside upon the coverlet. 

‘Still that must be expected,’ said Gandalf to himself. ‘He 
is not half through yet, and to what he will come in the end 
not even Elrond can foretell. Not to evil, I think. He may 
become like a glass filled with a clear light for eyes to see that 
can.’ 

“You look splendid,’ he said aloud. ‘I will risk a brief tale 
without consulting Elrond. But quite brief, mind you, and 
then you must sleep again. This is what happened, as far as 
I can gather. The Riders made straight for you, as soon as 
you fled. They did not need the guidance of their horses any 
longer: you had become visible to them, being already on the 
threshold of their world. And also the Ring drew them. Your 
friends sprang aside, off the road, or they would have been 
ridden down. They knew that nothing could save you, if the 
white horse could not. The Riders were too swift to over- 
take, and too many to oppose. On foot even Glorfindel and 
Aragorn together could not withstand all the Nine at once. 

‘When the Ringwraiths swept by, your friends ran up 
behind. Close to the Ford there is a small hollow beside the 
road masked by a few stunted trees. There they hastily 
kindled fire; for Glorfindel knew that a flood would come 
down, if the Riders tried to cross, and then he would have to 
deal with any that were left on his side of the river. The 
moment the flood appeared, he rushed out, followed by 
Aragorn and the others with flaming brands. Caught between 
fire and water, and seeing an Elf-lord revealed in his wrath, 
they were dismayed, and their horses were stricken with mad- 
ness. Three were carried away by the first assault of the flood; 
the others were now hurled into the water by their horses and 
overwhelmed.’ 

‘And is that the end of the Black Riders?’ asked Frodo. 

‘No,’ said Gandalf. “Their horses must have perished, 
and without them they are crippled. But the Ringwraiths 


292 THE FELLOWSHIP OF THE RING 


themselves cannot be so easily destroyed. However, there is 
nothing more to fear from them at present. Your friends 
crossed after the flood had passed and they found you lying 
on your face at the top of the bank, with a broken sword 
under you. The horse was standing guard beside you. You 
were pale and cold, and they feared that you were dead, or 
worse. Elrond’s folk met them, carrying you slowly towards 
Rivendell.’ 

‘Who made the flood?’ asked Frodo. 

‘Elrond commanded it,’ answered Gandalf. “The river of 
this valley is under his power, and it will rise in anger when 
he has great need to bar the Ford. As soon as the captain of 
the Ringwraiths rode into the water the flood was released. 
If I may say so, I added a few touches of my own: you may 
not have noticed, but some of the waves took the form of 
great white horses with shining white riders; and there were 
many rolling and grinding boulders. For a moment I was 
afraid that we had let loose too fierce a wrath, and the flood 
would get out of hand and wash you all away. There is great 
vigour in the waters that come down from the snows of the 
Misty Mountains.’ 

“Yes, it all comes back to me now,’ said Frodo: ‘the tremen- 
dous roaring. I thought I was drowning, with my friends and 
enemies and all. But now we are safe!’ 

Gandalf looked quickly at Frodo, but he had shut his eyes. 
“Yes, you are all safe for the present. Soon there will be 
feasting and merrymaking to celebrate the victory at the Ford 
of Bruinen, and you will all be there in places of honour.’ 

‘Splendid!’ said Frodo. ‘It is wonderful that Elrond, and 
Glorfindel and such great lords, not to mention Strider, 
should take so much trouble and show me so much kindness.’ 

‘Well, there are many reasons why they should,’ said 
Gandalf, smiling. ‘Iam one good reason. The Ring is another: 
you are the Ring-bearer. And you are the heir of Bilbo, the 
Ring-finder.’ 

‘Dear Bilbo!’ said Frodo sleepily. ‘I wonder where he is. I 
wish he was here and could hear all about it. It would have 


MANY MEETINGS 293 


made him laugh. The cow jumped over the Moon! And the 
poor old troll!’ With that he fell fast asleep. 


Frodo was now safe in the Last Homely House east of the 
Sea. That house was, as Bilbo had long ago reported, ‘a 
perfect house, whether you like food or sleep or story-telling 
or singing, or just sitting and thinking best, or a pleasant 
mixture of them all’. Merely to be there was a cure for weari- 
ness, fear, and sadness. 

As the evening drew on, Frodo woke up again, and he 
found that he no longer felt in need of rest or sleep, but had 
a mind for food and drink, and probably for singing and 
story-telling afterwards. He got out of bed and discovered 
that his arm was already nearly as useful again as it ever had 
been. He found laid ready clean garments of green cloth that 
fitted him excellently. Looking in a mirror he was startled to 
see a much thinner reflection of himself than he remembered: 
it looked remarkably like the young nephew of Bilbo who 
used to go tramping with his uncle in the Shire; but the eyes 
looked out at him thoughtfully. 

“Yes, you have seen a thing or two since you last peeped 
out of a looking-glass,’ he said to his reflection. ‘But now for 
a merry meeting!’ He stretched out his arms and whistled a 
tune. 

At that moment there was a knock on the door, and Sam 
came in. He ran to Frodo and took his left hand, awkwardly 
and shyly. He stroked it gently and then he blushed and 
turned hastily away. 

‘Hullo, Sam!’ said Frodo. 

‘Tt’s warm!’ said Sam. ‘Meaning your hand, Mr. Frodo. It 
has felt so cold through the long nights. But glory and trum- 
pets! he cried, turning round again with shining eyes and 
dancing on the floor. ‘It’s fine to see you up and yourself 
again, sir! Gandalf asked me to come and see if you were 
ready to come down, and I thought he was joking.’ 

‘Tam ready,’ said Frodo. ‘Let’s go and look for the rest of 
the party!’ 


294 THE FELLOWSHIP OF THE RING 


‘I can take you to them, sir,’ said Sam. ‘It’s a big house 
this, and very peculiar. Always a bit more to discover, and 
no knowing what you'll find round a corner. And Elves, sir! 
Elves here, and Elves there! Some like kings, terrible and 
splendid; and some as merry as children. And the music and 
the singing — not that I have had the time or the heart for 
much listening since we got here. But I’m getting to know 
some of the ways of the place.’ 

‘I know what you have been doing, Sam,’ said Frodo, 
taking his arm. ‘But you shall be merry tonight, and listen to 
your heart’s content. Come on, guide me round the corners!’ 

Sam led him along several passages and down many steps 
and out into a high garden above the steep bank of the river. 
He found his friends sitting in a porch on the side of the 
house looking east. Shadows had fallen in the valley below, 
but there was still a light on the faces of the mountains far 
above. The air was warm. The sound of running and falling 
water was loud, and the evening was filled with a faint scent 
of trees and flowers, as if summer still lingered in Elrond’s 
gardens. 

‘Hurray!’ cried Pippin, springing up. ‘Here is our noble 
cousin! Make way for Frodo, Lord of the Ring!’ 

‘Hush!’ said Gandalf from the shadows at the back of the 
porch. ‘Evil things do not come into this valley; but all the 
same we should not name them. The Lord of the Ring is not 
Frodo, but the master of the Dark Tower of Mordor, whose 
power is again stretching out over the world. We are sitting 
in a fortress. Outside it is getting dark.’ 

‘Gandalf has been saying many cheerful things like that,’ 
said Pippin. ‘He thinks I need keeping in order. But it seems 
impossible, somehow, to feel gloomy or depressed in this 
place. I feel I could sing, if I knew the right song for the 
occasion.’ 

‘T feel like singing myself,’ laughed Frodo. “Though at the 
moment I feel more like eating and drinking.’ 

“That will soon be cured,’ said Pippin. ‘You have shown 
your usual cunning in getting up just in time for a meal.’ 


MANY MEETINGS 295 


‘More than a meal! A feast!’ said Merry. ‘As soon as 
Gandalf reported that you were recovered, the preparations 
began.’ He had hardly finished speaking when they were 
summoned to the hall by the ringing of many bells. 


The hall of Elrond’s house was filled with folk: Elves for 
the most part, though there were a few guests of other sorts. 
Elrond, as was his custom, sat in a great chair at the end of 
the long table upon the dais; and next to him on the one side 
sat Glorfindel, on the other side sat Gandalf. 

Frodo looked at them in wonder; for he had never before 
seen Elrond, of whom so many tales spoke; and as they 
sat upon his right hand and his left, Glorfindel, and even 
Gandalf, whom he thought he knew so well, were revealed 
as lords of dignity and power. 

Gandalf was shorter in stature than the other two; but his 
long white hair, his sweeping silver beard, and his broad 
shoulders, made him look like some wise king of ancient 
legend. In his aged face under great snowy brows his dark 
eyes were set like coals that could leap suddenly into fire. 

Glorfindel was tall and straight; his hair was of shining 
gold, his face fair and young and fearless and full of joy; his 
eyes were bright and keen, and his voice like music; on his 
brow sat wisdom, and in his hand was strength. 

The face of Elrond was ageless, neither old nor young, 
though in it was written the memory of many things both 
glad and sorrowful. His hair was dark as the shadows of 
twilight, and upon it was set a circlet of silver; his eyes were 
grey as a clear evening, and in them was a light like the light 
of stars. Venerable he seemed as a king crowned with many 
winters, and yet hale as a tried warrior in the fulness of his 
strength. He was the Lord of Rivendell and mighty among 
both Elves and Men. 

In the middle of the table, against the woven cloths upon 
the wall, there was a chair under a canopy, and there sat a 
lady fair to look upon, and so like was she in form of woman- 
hood to Elrond that Frodo guessed that she was one of his 


296 THE FELLOWSHIP OF THE RING 


close kindred. Young she was and yet not so. The braids of 
her dark hair were touched by no frost; her white arms and 
clear face were flawless and smooth, and the light of stars 
was in her bright eyes, grey as a cloudless night; yet queenly 
she looked, and thought and knowledge were in her glance, 
as of one who has known many things that the years bring. 
Above her brow her head was covered with a cap of silver 
lace netted with small gems, glittering white; but her soft grey 
raiment had no ornament save a girdle of leaves wrought in 
silver. 

So it was that Frodo saw her whom few mortals had yet 
seen; Arwen, daughter of Elrond, in whom it was said that 
the likeness of Luthien had come on earth again; and she was 
called Undomiel, for she was the Evenstar of her people. 
Long she had been in the land of her mother’s kin, in Lorien 
beyond the mountains, and was but lately returned to Riven- 
dell to her father’s house. But her brothers, Elladan and 
Elrohir, were out upon errantry; for they rode often far afield 
with the Rangers of the North, forgetting never their mother’s 
torment in the dens of the orcs. 

Such loveliness in living thing Frodo had never seen before 
nor imagined in his mind; and he was both surprised and 
abashed to find that he had a seat at Elrond’s table among all 
these folk so high and fair. Though he had a suitable chair, 
and was raised upon several cushions, he felt very small, and 
rather out of place; but that feeling quickly passed. The feast 
was merry and the food all that his hunger could desire. It 
was some time before he looked about him again or even 
turned to his neighbours. 

He looked first for his friends. Sam had begged to be 
allowed to wait on his master, but had been told that for this 
time he was a guest of honour. Frodo could see him now, 
sitting with Pippin and Merry at the upper end of one of 
the side-tables close to the dais. He could see no sign of 
Strider. 

Next to Frodo on his right sat a dwarf of important appear- 
ance, richly dressed. His beard, very long and forked, was 


MANY MEETINGS 297 


white, nearly as white as the snow-white cloth of his garments. 
He wore a silver belt, and round his neck hung a chain of 
silver and diamonds. Frodo stopped eating to look at him. 

‘Welcome and well met!’ said the dwarf, turning towards 
him. Then he actually rose from his seat and bowed. ‘Gloin 
at your service,’ he said, and bowed still lower. 

‘Frodo Baggins at your service and your family’s,’ said 
Frodo correctly, rising in surprise and scattering his cushions. 
‘Am I right in guessing that you are the Gloin, one of the 
twelve companions of the great Thorin Oakenshield?’ 

‘Quite right,’ answered the dwarf, gathering up the 
cushions and courteously assisting Frodo back into his seat. 
‘And I do not ask, for I have already been told that you 
are the kinsman and adopted heir of our friend Bilbo the 
renowned. Allow me to congratulate you on your recovery.’ 

“Thank you very much,’ said Frodo. 

“You have had some very strange adventures, I hear,’ said 
Gloin. ‘I wonder greatly what brings four hobbits on so long 
a journey. Nothing like it has happened since Bilbo came 
with us. But perhaps I should not inquire too closely, since 
Elrond and Gandalf do not seem disposed to talk of this?’ 

‘I think we will not speak of it, at least not yet,’ said Frodo 
politely. He guessed that even in Elrond’s house the matter 
of the Ring was not one for casual talk; and in any case he 
wished to forget his troubles for a time. ‘But I am equally 
curious,’ he added, ‘to learn what brings so important a dwarf 
so far from the Lonely Mountain.’ 

Gloin looked at him. ‘If you have not heard, I think we will 
not speak yet of that either. Master Elrond will summon us 
all ere long, I believe, and then we shall all hear many things. 
But there is much else that may be told.’ 

Throughout the rest of the meal they talked together, but 
Frodo listened more than he spoke; for the news of the Shire, 
apart from the Ring, seemed small and far-away and unim- 
portant, while Gloin had much to tell of events in the northern 
regions of Wilderland. Frodo learned that Grimbeorn the 
Old, son of Beorn, was now the lord of many sturdy men, 


298 THE FELLOWSHIP OF THE RING 


and to their land between the Mountains and Mirkwood 
neither orc nor wolf dared to go. 

‘Indeed,’ said Gloin, ‘if it were not for the Beornings, the 
passage from Dale to Rivendell would long ago have become 
impossible. They are valiant men and keep open the High 
Pass and the Ford of Carrock. But their tolls are high,’ he 
added with a shake of his head; ‘and like Beorn of old they 
are not over fond of dwarves. Still, they are trusty, and that 
is much in these days. Nowhere are there any men so friendly 
to us as the Men of Dale. They are good folk, the Bardings. 
The grandson of Bard the Bowman rules them, Brand son 
of Bain son of Bard. He is a strong king, and his realm now 
reaches far south and east of Esgaroth.’ 

‘And what of your own people?’ asked Frodo. 

“There is much to tell, good and bad,’ said Gloin; ‘yet it is 
mostly good: we have so far been fortunate, though we do 
not escape the shadow of these times. If you really wish to 
hear of us, I will tell you tidings gladly. But stop me when 
you are weary! Dwarves’ tongues run on when speaking of 
their handiwork, they say.’ 

And with that Gloin embarked on a long account of the 
doings of the Dwarf-kingdom. He was delighted to have 
found so polite a listener; for Frodo showed no sign of weari- 
ness and made no attempt to change the subject, though 
actually he soon got rather lost among the strange names of 
people and places that he had never heard of before. He was 
interested, however, to hear that Dain was still King under 
the Mountain, and was now old (having passed his two 
hundred and fiftieth year), venerable, and fabulously rich. Of 
the ten companions who had survived the Battle of Five 
Armies seven were still with him: Dwalin, Gloin, Dori, Nori, 
Bifur, Bofur, and Bombur. Bombur was now so fat that he 
could not move himself from his couch to his chair at table, 
and it took six young dwarves to lift him. 

‘And what has become of Balin and Ori and Oin?’ asked 
Frodo. 

A shadow passed over Gldin’s face. “We do not know,’ he 


MANY MEETINGS 299 


answered. ‘It is largely on account of Balin that I have come 
to ask the advice of those that dwell in Rivendell. But tonight 
let us speak of merrier things!’ 

Gloin began then to talk of the works of his people, telling 
Frodo about their great labours in Dale and under the Moun- 
tain. ‘We have done well,’ he said. ‘But in metal-work we 
cannot rival our fathers, many of whose secrets are lost. We 
make good armour and keen swords, but we cannot again 
make mail or blade to match those that were made before the 
dragon came. Only in mining and building have we surpassed 
the old days. You should see the waterways of Dale, Frodo, 
and the fountains, and the pools! You should see the stone- 
paved roads of many colours! And the halls and cavernous 
streets under the earth with arches carved like trees; and the 
terraces and towers upon the Mountain’s sides! Then you 
would see that we have not been idle.’ 

‘I will come and see them, if ever I can,’ said Frodo. ‘How 
surprised Bilbo would have been to see all the changes in the 
Desolation of Smaug!’ 

Gloin looked at Frodo and smiled. ‘You were very fond of 
Bilbo were you not?’ he asked. 

‘Yes,’ answered Frodo. ‘I would rather see him than all the 
towers and palaces in the world.’ 


At length the feast came to an end. Elrond and Arwen rose 
and went down the hall, and the company followed them 
in due order. The doors were thrown open, and they went 
across a wide passage and through other doors, and came 
into a further hall. In it were no tables, but a bright fire was 
burning in a great hearth between the carven pillars upon 
either side. 

Frodo found himself walking with Gandalf. “This is the 
Hall of Fire,’ said the wizard. ‘Here you will hear many songs 
and tales — if you can keep awake. But except on high days 
it usually stands empty and quiet, and people come here who 
wish for peace, and thought. There is always a fire here, all 
the year round, but there is little other light.’ 


300 THE FELLOWSHIP OF THE RING 


As Elrond entered and went towards the seat prepared for 
him, Elvish minstrels began to make sweet music. Slowly the 
hall filled, and Frodo looked with delight upon the many fair 
faces that were gathered together; the golden firelight played 
upon them and shimmered in their hair. Suddenly he noticed, 
not far from the further end of the fire, a small dark figure 
seated on a stool with his back propped against a pillar. Beside 
him on the ground was a drinking-cup and some bread. 
Frodo wondered whether he was ill (if people were ever ill in 
Rivendell), and had been unable to come to the feast. His 
head seemed sunk in sleep on his breast, and a fold of his 
dark cloak was drawn over his face. 

Elrond went forward and stood beside the silent figure. 
‘Awake, little master!’ he said, with a smile. Then, turning to 
Frodo, he beckoned to him. ‘Now at last the hour has come 
that you have wished for, Frodo,’ he said. ‘Here is a friend 
that you have long missed.’ 

The dark figure raised its head and uncovered its face. 

‘Bilbo!’ cried Frodo with sudden recognition, and he 
sprang forward. 

“Hullo, Frodo my lad!’ said Bilbo. ‘So you have got here at 
last. I hoped you would manage it. Well, well! So all this 
feasting is in your honour, I hear. I hope you enjoyed 
yourself ?’ 

‘Why weren’t you there?’ cried Frodo. ‘And why haven’t 
I been allowed to see you before?’ 

‘Because you were asleep. I have seen a good deal of vou. 
I have sat by your side with Sam each day. But as for the 
feast, I don’t go in for such things much now. And I had 
something else to do.’ 

‘What were you doing?’ 

‘Why, sitting and thinking. I do a lot of that nowadays, and 
this is the best place to do it in, as a rule. Wake up, indeed!’ 
he said, cocking an eye at Elrond. There was a bright twinkle 
in it and no sign of sleepiness that Frodo could see. ‘Wake 
up! I was not asleep, Master Elrond. If you want to know, 
you have all come out from your feast too soon, and you 


MANY MEETINGS 301 


have disturbed me — in the middle of making up a song. I 
was stuck over a line or two, and was thinking about them; 
but now I don’t suppose I shall ever get them right. There 
will be such a deal of singing that the ideas will be driven clean 
out of my head. I shall have to get my friend the Dunadan to 
help me. Where is he?’ 

Elrond laughed. ‘He shall be found,’ he said. “Then you 
two shall go into a corner and finish your task, and we will 
hear it and judge it before we end our merrymaking.’ Messen- 
gers were sent to find Bilbo’s friend, though none knew where 
he was, or why he had not been present at the feast. 

In the meanwhile Frodo and Bilbo sat side by side, and 
Sam came quickly and placed himself near them. They talked 
together in soft voices, oblivious of the mirth and music in 
the hall about them. Bilbo had not much to say of himself. 
When he had left Hobbiton he had wandered off aimlessly, 
along the Road or in the country on either side; but somehow 
he had steered all the time towards Rivendell. 

‘T got here without much adventure,’ he said, ‘and after a 
rest I went on with the dwarves to Dale: my last journey. I 
shan’t travel again. Old Balin had gone away. Then I came 
back here, and here I have been. I have done this and that. 
Ihave written some more of my book. And, of course, I make 
up a few songs. They sing them occasionally: just to please 
me, I think; for, of course, they aren’t really good enough for 
Rivendell. And I listen and I think. Time doesn’t seem to 
pass here: it just is. A remarkable place altogether. 

‘I hear all kinds of news, from over the Mountains, and 
out of the South, but hardly anything from the Shire. I heard 
about the Ring, of course. Gandalf has been here often. Not 
that he has told me a great deal, he has become closer than 
ever these last few years. The Dunadan has told me more. 
Fancy that ring of mine causing such a disturbance! It is a 
pity that Gandalf did not find out more sooner. I could have 
brought the thing here myself long ago without so much 
trouble. I have thought several times of going back to Hobbi- 
ton for it; but I am getting old, and they would not let me: 


302 THE FELLOWSHIP OF THE RING 


Gandalf and Elrond, I mean. They seemed to think that the 
Enemy was looking high and low for me, and would make 
mincemeat of me, if he caught me tottering about in the 
Wild. 

‘And Gandalf said: ‘““The Ring has passed on, Bilbo. It 
would do no good to you or to others, if you tried to meddle 
with it again.” Odd sort of remark, just like Gandalf. But he 
said he was looking after you, so I let things be. I am fright- 
fully glad to see you safe and sound.’ He paused and looked 
at Frodo doubtfully. 

‘Have you got it here?’ he asked in a whisper. ‘I can’t help 
feeling curious, you know, after all Pve heard. I should very 
much like just to peep at it again.’ 

‘Yes, Pve got it,’ answered Frodo, feeling a strange reluc- 
tance. ‘It looks just the same as ever it did.’ 

‘Well, I should just like to see it for a moment,’ said Bilbo. 

When he had dressed, Frodo found that while he slept the 
Ring had been hung about his neck on a new chain, light but 
strong. Slowly he drew it out. Bilbo put out his hand. But 
Frodo quickly drew back the Ring. To his distress and amaze- 
ment he found that he was no longer looking at Bilbo; a 
shadow seemed to have fallen between them, and through 
it he found himself eyeing a little wrinkled creature with a 
hungry face and bony groping hands. He felt a desire to strike 
him. 

The music and singing round them seemed to falter, and 
a silence fell. Bilbo looked quickly at Frodo’s face and passed 
his hand across his eyes. ‘I understand now,’ he said. ‘Put it 
away! I am sorry: sorry you have come in for this burden; 
sorry about everything. Don’t adventures ever have an end? 
I suppose not. Someone else always has to carry on the story. 
Well, it can’t be helped. I wonder if it’s any good trying to 
finish my book? But don’t let’s worry about it now - let’s 
have some real News! Tell me all about the Shire!’ 


Frodo hid the Ring away, and the shadow passed leaving 
hardly a shred of memory. The light and music of Rivendell 


MANY MEETINGS 303 


was about him again. Bilbo smiled and laughed happily. 
Every item of news from the Shire that Frodo could tell — 
aided and corrected now and again by Sam — was of the 
greatest interest to him, from the felling of the least tree to 
the pranks of the smallest child in Hobbiton. They were so 
deep in the doings of the Four Farthings that they did not 
notice the arrival of a man clad in dark green cloth. For many 
minutes he stood looking down at them with a smile. 

Suddenly Bilbo looked up. ‘Ah, there you are at last, Dun- 
adan!’ he cried. 

‘Strider!’ said Frodo. ‘You seem to have a lot of names.’ 

‘Well, Strider is one that I haven’t heard before, anyway,’ 
said Bilbo. ‘What do you call him that for?’ 

“They call me that in Bree,’ said Strider laughing, ‘and that 
is how I was introduced to him.’ 

‘And why do you call him Dunadan?’ asked Frodo. 

‘The Dunadan,’ said Bilbo. ‘He is often called that here. 
But I thought you knew enough Elvish at least to know duin- 
adan: Man of the West, Numenorean. But this is not the time 
for lessons!’ He turned to Strider. ‘Where have you been, my 
friend? Why weren’t you at the feast? The Lady Arwen was 
there.’ 

Strider looked down at Bilbo gravely. ‘I know,’ he said. 
‘But often I must put mirth aside. Elladan and Elrohir have 
returned out of the Wild unlooked-for, and they had tidings 
that I wished to hear at once.’ 

‘Well, my dear fellow,’ said Bilbo, ‘now you’ve heard the 
news, can’t you spare me a moment? I want your help in 
something urgent. Elrond says this song of mine is to be 
finished before the end of the evening, and I am stuck. Let’s 
go off into a corner and polish it up!’ 

Strider smiled. ‘Come then!’ he said. ‘Let me hear it!’ 


Frodo was left to himself for a while, for Sam had fallen 
asleep. He was alone and felt rather forlorn, although all 
about him the folk of Rivendell were gathered. But those near 
him were silent, intent upon the music of the voices and the 


304 THE FELLOWSHIP OF THE RING 


instruments, and they gave no heed to anything else. Frodo 
began to listen. 

At first the beauty of the melodies and of the interwoven 
words in elven-tongues, even though he understood them 
little, held him in a spell, as soon as he began to attend to 
them. Almost it seemed that the words took shape, and 
visions of far lands and bright things that he had never yet 
imagined opened out before him; and the firelit hall became 
like a golden mist above seas of foam that sighed upon the 
margins of the world. Then the enchantment became more 
and more dreamlike, until he felt that an endless river of 
swelling gold and silver was flowing over him, too multitu- 
dinous for its pattern to be comprehended; it became part of 
the throbbing air about him, and it drenched and drowned 
him. Swiftly he sank under its shining weight into a deep 
realm of sleep. 

There he wandered long in a dream of music that turned 
into running water, and then suddenly into a voice. It seemed 
to be the voice of Bilbo chanting verses. Faint at first and 
then clearer ran the words. 


Edrendil was a mariner 

that tarried in Arvernien; 

he built a boat of timber felled 

in Nimbrethil to journey in; 

her sails he wove of silver fair, 

of silver were her lanterns made, 
her prow he fashioned like a swan, 
and light upon her banners laid. 


In panoply of ancient kings, 

in chainéd rings he armoured him; 

his shining shield was scored with runes 
to ward all wounds and harm from him; 
his bow was made of dragon-horn, 

his arrows shorn of ebony, 

of silver was his habergeon, 


MANY MEETINGS 


his scabbard of chalcedony; 
his sword of steel was valiant, 
of adamant his helmet tall, 
an eagle-plume upon his crest, 
upon his breast an emerald. 


Beneath the Moon and under star 

he wandered far from northern strands, 
bewildered on enchanted ways 

beyond the days of mortal lands. 
From gnashing of the Narrow Ice 
where shadow lies on frozen hills, 
from nether heats and burning waste 
he turned in haste, and roving still 

on starless waters far astray 

at last he came to Night of Naught, 
and passed, and never sight he saw 

of shining shore nor light he sought. 
The winds of wrath came driving him, 
and blindly in the foam he fled 

from west to east, and errandless, 
unheralded he homeward sped. 


There flying Elwing came to him, 
and flame was in the darkness lit; 
more bright than light of diamond 

the fire upon her carcanet. 

The Silmaril she bound on him 

and crowned him with the hving light, 
and dauntless then with burning brow 
he turned his prow; and in the night 
from Otherworld beyond the Sea 
there strong and free a storm arose, 

a wind of power in Tarmenel; 

by paths that seldom mortal goes 

his boat it bore with biting breath 

as might of death across the grey 


305 


306 


THE FELLOWSHIP OF THE RING 


and long-forsaken seas distressed: 
from east to west he passed away. 


Through Evernight he back was borne 
on black and roaring waves that ran 
over leagues unlit and foundered shores 
that drowned before the Days began, 
until he heard on strands of pearl 
where ends the world the music long, 
where ever-foaming billows roll 

the yellow gold and jewels wan. 

He saw the Mountain silent rise 
where twilight les upon the knees 

of Valinor, and Eldamar 

beheld afar beyond the seas. 

A wanderer escaped from night 

to haven white he came at last, 

to Elvenhome the green and fair 
where keen the air, where pale as glass 
beneath the Hill of Ilmarin 

a-glimmer in a valley sheer 

the lamplit towers of Tirion 

are mirrored on the Shadowmere. 


He tarried there from errantry, 

and melodies they taught to him, 

and sages old him marvels told, 

and harps of gold they brought to him. 
They clothed him then in elven-white, 
and seven lights before him sent, 

as through the Calacirian 

to hidden land forlorn he went. 

He came unto the timeless halls 
where shining fall the countless years, 
and endless reigns the Elder King 

in Ilmarin on Mountain sheer; 

and words unheard were spoken then 


MANY MEETINGS 307 


of folk of Men and Elven-kin, 
beyond the world were visions showed 
forbid to those that dwell therein. 


A ship then new they built for him 
of mithril and of elven-glass 

with shining prow; no shaven oar 
nor sail she bore on silver mast: 
the Silmaril as lantern light 

and banner bright with living flame 
to gleam thereon by Elbereth 
herself was set, who thither came 
and wings immortal made for him, 
and laid on him undying doom, 

to sail the shoreless skies and come 
behind the Sun and light of Moon. 


From Evereven’s lofty hills 

where softly silver fountains fall 

his wings him bore, a wandering light, 
beyond the mighty Mountain Wall. 
From World’s End then he turned away, 
and yearned again to find afar 

his home through shadows journeying, 
and burning as an tsland star 

on high above the mists he came, 

a distant flame before the Sun, 

a wonder ere the waking dawn 

where grey the Norland waters run. 


And over Middle-earth he passed 
and heard at last the weeping sore 
of women and of elven-maids 

in Elder Days, in years of yore. 

But on him mighty doom was laid, 
till Moon should fade, an orbéd star 
to pass, and tarry never more 


308 THE FELLOWSHIP OF THE RING 


on Hither Shores where mortals are; 
for ever still a herald on 

an errand that should never rest 

to bear his shining lamp afar, 

the Flammifer of Westernesse. 


The chanting ceased. Frodo opened his eyes and saw that 
Bilbo was seated on his stool in a circle of listeners, who were 
smiling and applauding. 

‘Now we had better have it again,’ said an EIf. 

Bilbo got up and bowed. ‘I am flattered, Lindir,’ he said. 
‘But it would be too tiring to repeat it all.’ 

‘Not too tiring for you,’ the Elves answered laughing. ‘You 
know you are never tired of reciting your own verses. But 
really we cannot answer your question at one hearing!’ 

‘What!’ cried Bilbo. “You can’t tell which parts were mine, 
and which were the Dunadan’s?’ 

‘It is not easy for us to tell the difference between two 
mortals,’ said the EIf. 

‘Nonsense, Lindir,’ snorted Bilbo. ‘If you can’t distinguish 
between a Man and a Hobbit, your judgement is poorer than 
ITimagined. They’re as different as peas and apples.’ 

‘Maybe. To sheep other sheep no doubt appear different,’ 
laughed Lindir. ‘Or to shepherds. But Mortals have not been 
our study. We have other business.’ 

‘I won’t argue with you,’ said Bilbo. ‘I am sleepy after so 
much music and singing. [ll leave you to guess, if you want 
to. 

He got up and came towards Frodo. ‘Well, that’s over,’ he 
said in a low voice. ‘It went off better than I expected. I don’t 
often get asked for a second hearing. What did you think 
of it?’ 

‘I am not going to try and guess,’ said Frodo smiling. 

“You needn’t,’ said Bilbo. ‘As a matter of fact it was all 
mine. Except that Aragorn insisted on my putting in a green 
stone. He seemed to think it important. I don’t know why. 
Otherwise he obviously thought the whole thing rather above 


MANY MEETINGS 309 


my head, and he said that if I had the cheek to make verses 
about Earendil in the house of Elrond, it was my affair. I 
suppose he was right.’ 

‘I don’t know,’ said Frodo. ‘It seemed to me to fit somehow, 
though I can’t explain. I was half asleep when you began, 
and it seemed to follow on from something that I was dream- 
ing about. I didn’t understand that it was really you speaking 
until near the end.’ 

‘Tt zs difficult to keep awake here, until you get used to it,’ 
said Bilbo. ‘Not that hobbits would ever acquire quite the 
Elvish appetite for music and poetry and tales. They seem to 
like them as much as food, or more. They will be going on 
for a long time yet. What do you say to slipping off for some 
more quiet talk?’ 

‘Can we?’ said Frodo. 

‘Of course. This is merrymaking not business. Come and 
go as you like, as long as you don’t make a noise.’ 


They got up and withdrew quietly into the shadows, and 
made for the doors. Sam they left behind, fast asleep still with 
a smile on his face. In spite of his delight in Bilbo’s company 
Frodo felt a tug of regret as they passed out of the Hall of 
Fire. Even as they stepped over the threshold a single clear 
voice rose in song. 


A Elbereth Gilthoniel, 
silivren penna miriel 

o menel aglar elenath! 
Na-chaered palan-diriel 

o galadhremmin ennorath, 
Fanutlos, le innathon 

nef aear, si nef aearon! 


Frodo halted for a moment, looking back. Elrond was in 
his chair and the fire was on his face like summer-light upon 
the trees. Near him sat the Lady Arwen. To his surprise 
Frodo saw that Aragorn stood beside her; his dark cloak was 


310 THE FELLOWSHIP OF THE RING 


thrown back, and he seemed to be clad in elven-mail, and a 
star shone on his breast. They spoke together, and then sud- 
denly it seemed to Frodo that Arwen turned towards him, 
and the light of her eyes fell on him from afar and pierced 
his heart. 

He stood still enchanted, while the sweet syllables of the 
Elvish song fell like clear jewels of blended word and melody. 
‘It is a song to Elbereth,’ said Bilbo. “They will sing that, and 
other songs of the Blessed Realm, many times tonight. Come 
on!’ 

He led Frodo back to his own little room. It opened on to 
the gardens and looked south across the ravine of the 
Bruinen. There they sat for some while, looking through the 
window at the bright stars above the steep-climbing woods, 
and talking softly. They spoke no more of the small news of 
the Shire far away, nor of the dark shadows and perils that 
encompassed them, but of the fair things they had seen in 
the world together, of the Elves, of the stars, of trees, and the 
gentle fall of the bright year in the woods. 


At last there came a knock on the door. ‘Begging your 
pardon,’ said Sam, putting in his head, ‘but I was just wonder- 
ing if you would be wanting anything.’ 

‘And begging yours, Sam Gamgee,’ replied Bilbo. ‘I guess 
you mean that it is time your master went to bed.’ 

‘Well, sir, there is a Council early tomorrow, I hear, and 
he only got up today for the first time.’ 

‘Quite right, Sam,’ laughed Bilbo. ‘You can trot off and 
tell Gandalf that he has gone to bed. Good night, Frodo! 
Bless me, but it has been good to see you again! There are 
no folk like hobbits after all for a real good talk. I am getting 
very old, and I began to wonder if I should live to see your 
chapters of our story. Good night! [ll take a walk, I think, 
and look at the stars of Elbereth in the garden. Sleep well!’ 


Chapter 2 


THE COUNCIL OF ELROND 


Next day Frodo woke early, feeling refreshed and well. He 
walked along the terraces above the loud-flowing Bruinen 
and watched the pale, cool sun rise above the far mountains, 
and shine down, slanting through the thin silver mist; the 
dew upon the yellow leaves was glimmering, and the woven 
nets of gossamer twinkled on every bush. Sam walked beside 
him, saying nothing, but sniffing the air, and looking every 
now and again with wonder in his eyes at the great heights 
in the East. The snow was white upon their peaks. 

On a seat cut in the stone beside a turn in the path they 
came upon Gandalf and Bilbo deep in talk. “Hullo! Good 
morning!’ said Bilbo. ‘Feel ready for the great council?’ 

‘T feel ready for anything,’ answered Frodo. ‘But most of 
all I should like to go walking today and explore the valley. I 
should like to get into those pine-woods up there.’ He pointed 
away far up the side of Rivendell to the north. 

“You may have a chance later,’ said Gandalf. ‘But we cannot 
make any plans yet. There is much to hear and decide today.’ 


Suddenly as they were talking a single clear bell rang out. 
“That is the warning bell for the Council of Elrond,’ cried 
Gandalf. ‘Come along now! Both you and Bilbo are wanted.’ 

Frodo and Bilbo followed the wizard quickly along the 
winding path back to the house; behind them, uninvited and 
for the moment forgotten, trotted Sam. 

Gandalf led them to the porch where Frodo had found his 
friends the evening before. The light of the clear autumn 
morning was now glowing in the valley. The noise of bub- 
bling waters came up from the foaming river-bed. Birds were 
singing, and a wholesome peace lay on the land. To Frodo 


312 THE FELLOWSHIP OF THE RING 


his dangerous flight, and the rumours of the darkness growing 
in the world outside, already seemed only the memories of a 
troubled dream; but the faces that were turned to meet them 
as they entered were grave. 

Elrond was there, and several others were seated in silence 
about him. Frodo saw Glorfindel and Gloin; and in a corner 
alone Strider was sitting, clad in his old travel-worn clothes 
again. Elrond drew Frodo to a seat by his side, and presented 
him to the company, saying: 

‘Here, my friends, is the hobbit, Frodo son of Drogo. Few 
have ever come hither through greater peril or on an errand 
more urgent.’ 

He then pointed out and named those whom Frodo had 
not met before. There was a younger dwarf at Gloin’s side: 
his son Gimli. Beside Glorfindel there were several other 
counsellors of Elrond’s household, of whom Erestor was the 
chief; and with him was Galdor, an Elf from the Grey Havens 
who had come on an errand from Cirdan the Shipwright. 
There was also a strange Elf clad in green and brown, 
Legolas, a messenger from his father, Thranduil, the King of 
the Elves of Northern Mirkwood. And seated a little apart 
was a tall man with a fair and noble face, dark-haired and 
grey-eyed, proud and stern of glance. 

He was cloaked and booted as if for a journey on horse- 
back; and indeed though his garments were rich, and his 
cloak was lined with fur, they were stained with long travel. 
He had a collar of silver in which a single white stone was 
set; his locks were shorn about his shoulders. On a baldric he 
wore a great horn tipped with silver that now was laid upon 
his knees. He gazed at Frodo and Bilbo with sudden wonder. 

‘Here,’ said Elrond, turning to Gandalf, ‘is Boromir, a man 
from the South. He arrived in the grey morning, and seeks 
for counsel. I have bidden him to be present, for here his 
questions will be answered.’ 


Not all that was spoken and debated in the Council need 
now be told. Much was said of events in the world outside, 


THE COUNCIL OF ELROND 313 


especially in the South, and in the wide lands east of the 
Mountains. Of these things Frodo had already heard many 
rumours; but the tale of Gloin was new to him, and when the 
dwarf spoke he listened attentively. It appeared that amid the 
splendour of their works of hand the hearts of the Dwarves 
of the Lonely Mountain were troubled. 

‘It is now many years ago,’ said Gloin, ‘that a shadow of 
disquiet fell upon our people. Whence it came we did not at 
first perceive. Words began to be whispered in secret: it was 
said that we were hemmed in a narrow place, and that greater 
wealth and splendour would be found in a wider world. Some 
spoke of Moria: the mighty works of our fathers that are 
called in our own tongue Khazad-dim; and they declared 
that now at last we had the power and numbers to return.’ 

Gloin sighed. ‘Moria! Moria! Wonder of the Northern 
world! Too deep we delved there, and woke the nameless 
fear. Long have its vast mansions lain empty since the chil- 
dren of Durin fled. But now we spoke of it again with longing, 
and yet with dread; for no dwarf has dared to pass the doors 
of Khazad-dtim for many lives of kings, save Thror only, and 
he perished. At last, however, Balin listened to the whispers, 
and resolved to go; and though Dain did not give leave will- 
ingly, he took with him Ori and Oin and many of our folk, 
and they went away south. 

“That was nigh on thirty years ago. For a while we had 
news and it seemed good: messages reported that Moria had 
been entered and a great work begun there. Then there was 
silence, and no word has ever come from Moria since. 

“Then about a year ago a messenger came to Dain, but not 
from Moria — from Mordor: a horseman in the night, who 
called Dain to his gate. The Lord Sauron the Great, so he 
said, wished for our friendship. Rings he would give for it, 
such as he gave of old. And he asked urgently concerning 
hobbits, of what kind they were, and where they dwelt. ‘‘For 
Sauron knows,” said he, “‘that one of these was known to 
you on a time.” 

‘At this we were greatly troubled, and we gave no answer. 


314 THE FELLOWSHIP OF THE RING 


And then his fell voice was lowered, and he would have 
sweetened it if he could. “As a small token only of your 
friendship Sauron asks this,” he said: “that you should find 
this thief,” such was his word, “and get from him, willing or 
no, a little ring, the least of rings, that once he stole. It is but 
a trifle that Sauron fancies, and an earnest of your good will. 
Find it, and three rings that the Dwarf-sires possessed of old 
shall be returned to you, and the realm of Moria shall be 
yours for ever. Find only news of the thief, whether he still 
lives and where, and you shall have great reward and lasting 
friendship from the Lord. Refuse, and things will not seem 
so well. Do you refuse?” 

‘At that his breath came like the hiss of snakes, and all who 
stood by shuddered, but Dain said: “I say neither yea nor 
nay. I must consider this message and what it means under 
its fair cloak.” 

““Consider well, but not too long,” said he. 

“““The time of my thought is my own to spend,” answered 
Dain. 

‘*For the present,” said he, and rode into the darkness. 

‘Heavy have the hearts of our chieftains been since that 
night. We needed not the fell voice of the messenger to warn 
us that his words held both menace and deceit; for we knew 
already that the power that has re-entered Mordor has not 
changed, and ever it betrayed us of old. Twice the messenger 
has returned, and has gone unanswered. The third and last 
time, so he says, is soon to come, before the ending of the 
year. 

‘And so I have been sent at last by Dain to warn Bilbo that 
he is sought by the Enemy, and to learn, if may be, why he 
desires this ring, this least of rings. Also we crave the advice 
of Elrond. For the Shadow grows and draws nearer. We 
discover that messengers have come also to King Brand in 
Dale, and that he is afraid. We fear that he may yield. Already 
war is gathering on his eastern borders. If we make no answer, 
the Enemy may move Men of his rule to assail King Brand, 
and Dain also.’ 


THE COUNCIL OF ELROND 315 


“You have done well to come,’ said Elrond. ‘You will hear 
today all that you need in order to understand the purposes 
of the Enemy. There is naught that you can do, other than 
to resist, with hope or without it. But you do not stand alone. 
You will learn that your trouble is but part of the trouble of 
all the western world. The Ring! What shall we do with the 
Ring, the least of rings, the trifle that Sauron fancies? That 
is the doom that we must deem. 

“That is the purpose for which you are called hither. Called, 
I say, though I have not called you to me, strangers from 
distant lands. You have come and are here met, in this very 
nick of time, by chance as it may seem. Yet it is not so. 
Believe rather that it is so ordered that we, who sit here, 
and none others, must now find counsel for the peril of the 
world. 

‘Now, therefore, things shall be openly spoken that have 
been hidden from all but a few until this day. And first, so 
that all may understand what is the peril, the Tale of the Ring 
shall be told from the beginning even to this present. And I 
will begin that tale, though others shall end it.’ 


Then all listened while Elrond in his clear voice spoke of 
Sauron and the Rings of Power, and their forging in the 
Second Age of the world long ago. A part of his tale was 
known to some there, but the full tale to none, and many 
eyes were turned to Elrond in fear and wonder as he told of 
the Elven-smiths of Eregion and their friendship with Moria, 
and their eagerness for knowledge, by which Sauron ensnared 
them. For in that time he was not yet evil to behold, and they 
received his aid and grew mighty in craft, whereas he learned 
all their secrets, and betrayed them, and forged secretly in 
the Mountain of Fire the One Ring to be their master. But 
Celebrimbor was aware of him, and hid the Three which he 
had made; and there was war, and the land was laid waste, 
and the gate of Moria was shut. 

Then through all the years that followed he traced the 
Ring; but since that history is elsewhere recounted, even as 


316 THE FELLOWSHIP OF THE RING 


Elrond himself set it down in his books of lore, it is not here 
recalled. For it is a long tale, full of deeds great and terrible, 
and briefly though Elrond spoke, the sun rode up the sky, 
and the morning was passing ere he ceased. 

Of Numenor he spoke, its glory and its fall, and the return 
of the Kings of Men to Middle-earth out of the deeps of the 
Sea, borne upon the wings of storm. Then Elendil the Tall 
and his mighty sons, Isildur and Anarion, became great lords; 
and the North-realm they made in Arnor, and the South- 
realm in Gondor above the mouths of Anduin. But Sauron 
of Mordor assailed them, and they made the Last Alliance of 
Elves and Men, and the hosts of Gil-galad and Elendil were 
mustered in Arnor. 

Thereupon Elrond paused a while and sighed. ‘I remember 
well the splendour of their banners,’ he said. ‘It recalled to 
me the glory of the Elder Days and the hosts of Beleriand, 
so many great princes and captains were assembled. And yet 
not so many, nor so fair, as when Thangorodrim was broken, 
and the Elves deemed that evil was ended for ever, and it was 
not so.’ 

“You remember?’ said Frodo, speaking his thought aloud 
in his astonishment. ‘But I thought,’ he stammered as Elrond 
turned towards him, ‘I thought that the fall of Gil-galad was 
a long age ago.’ 

‘So it was indeed,’ answered Elrond gravely. ‘But my 
memory reaches back even to the Elder Days. Earendil was 
my sire, who was born in Gondolin before its fall; and my 
mother was Elwing, daughter of Dior, son of Luthien of 
Doriath. I have seen three ages in the West of the world, and 
many defeats, and many fruitless victories. 

‘I was the herald of Gil-galad and marched with his host. 
I was at the Battle of Dagorlad before the Black Gate of 
Mordor, where we had the mastery: for the Spear of Gil-galad 
and the Sword of Elendil, Aeglos and Narsil, none could 
withstand. I beheld the last combat on the slopes of Orodruin, 
where Gil-galad died, and Elendil fell, and Narsil broke 
beneath him; but Sauron himself was overthrown, and Isildur 


THE COUNCIL OF ELROND 317 


cut the Ring from his hand with the hilt-shard of his father’s 
sword, and took it for his own.’ 

At this the stranger, Boromir, broke in. ‘So that is what 
became of the Ring!’ he cried. ‘If ever such a tale was told in 
the South, it has long been forgotten. I have heard of the 
Great Ring of him that we do not name; but we believed that 
it perished from the world in the ruin of his first realm. Isildur 
took it! That is tidings indeed.’ 

‘Alas! yes,’ said Elrond. ‘Isildur took it, as should not have 
been. It should have been cast then into Orodruin’s fire nigh 
at hand where it was made. But few marked what Isildur did. 
He alone stood by his father in that last mortal contest; and 
by Gil-galad only Cirdan stood, and I. But Isildur would not 
listen to our counsel. 

“This I will have as weregild for my father, and my 
brother,” he said; and therefore whether we would or no, he 
took it to treasure it. But soon he was betrayed by it to his 
death; and so it is named in the North Isildur’s Bane. Yet 
death maybe was better than what else might have befallen 
him. 

‘Only to the North did these tidings come, and only to a 
few. Small wonder is it that you have not heard them, 
Boromir. From the ruin of the Gladden Fields, where Isildur 
perished, three men only came ever back over the mountains 
after long wandering. One of these was Ohtar, the esquire of 
Isildur, who bore the shards of the sword of Elendil; and he 
brought them to Valandil, the heir of Isildur, who being but 
a child had remained here in Rivendell. But Narsil was broken 
and its light extinguished, and it has not yet been forged 
again. 

‘Fruitless did I call the victory of the Last Alliance? Not 
wholly so, yet it did not achieve its end. Sauron was dimin- 
ished, but not destroyed. His Ring was lost but not unmade. 
The Dark Tower was broken, but its foundations were not 
removed; for they were made with the power of the Ring, 
and while it remains they will endure. Many Elves and many 
mighty Men, and many of their friends, had perished in the 


318 THE FELLOWSHIP OF THE RING 


war. Anarion was slain, and Isildur was slain; and Gil-galad 
and Elendil were no more. Never again shall there be any 
such league of Elves and Men; for Men multiply and the 
Firstborn decrease, and the two kindreds are estranged. And 
ever since that day the race of Numenor has decayed, and 
the span of their years has lessened. 

‘In the North after the war and the slaughter of the Gladden 
Fields the Men of Westernesse were diminished, and their 
city of Annuminas beside Lake Evendim fell into ruin; and 
the heirs of Valandil removed and dwelt at Fornost on the 
high North Downs, and that now too is desolate. Men call it 
Deadmen’s Dike, and they fear to tread there. For the folk 
of Arnor dwindled, and their foes devoured them, and their 
lordship passed, leaving only green mounds in the grassy 
hills. 

‘In the South the realm of Gondor long endured; and for 
a while its splendour grew, recalling somewhat of the might 
of Numenor, ere it fell. High towers that people built, and 
strong places, and havens of many ships; and the winged 
crown of the Kings of Men was held in awe by folk of many 
tongues. Their chief city was Osgiliath, Citadel of the Stars, 
through the midst of which the River flowed. And Minas 
Ithil they built, Tower of the Rising Moon, eastward upon a 
shoulder of the Mountains of Shadow; and westward at the 
feet of the White Mountains Minas Anor they made, Tower 
of the Setting Sun. There in the courts of the King grew a 
white tree, from the seed of that tree which Isildur brought 
over the deep waters, and the seed of that tree before came 
from Eresséa, and before that out of the Uttermost West in 
the Day before days when the world was young. 

‘But in the wearing of the swift years of Middle-earth the 
line of Meneldil son of Anarion failed, and the Tree withered, 
and the blood of the Numenoreans became mingled with that 
of lesser men. Then the watch upon the walls of Mordor 
slept, and dark things crept back to Gorgoroth. And on a 
time evil things came forth, and they took Minas Ithil and 
abode in it, and they made it into a place of dread; and it is 


THE COUNCIL OF ELROND 319 


called Minas Morgul, the Tower of Sorcery. Then Minas 
Anor was named anew Minas Tirith, the Tower of Guard; 
and these two cities were ever at war, but Osgiliath which lay 
between was deserted and in its ruins shadows walked. 

‘So it has been for many lives of men. But the Lords of 
Minas Tirith still fight on, defying our enemies, keeping the 
passage of the River from Argonath to the Sea. And now that 
part of the tale that I shall tell is drawn to its close. For in the 
days of Isildur the Ruling Ring passed out of all knowledge, 
and the Three were released from its dominion. But now in 
this latter day they are in peril once more, for to our sorrow 
the One has been found. Others shall speak of its finding, for 
in that I played small part.’ 


He ceased, but at once Boromir stood up, tall and proud, 
before them. ‘Give me leave, Master Elrond,’ said he, ‘first 
to say more of Gondor, for verily from the land of Gondor I 
am come. And it would be well for all to know what passes 
there. For few, I deem, know of our deeds, and therefore 
guess little at their peril, if we should fail at last. 

‘Believe not that in the land of Gondor the blood of 
Numenor is spent, nor all its pride and dignity forgotten. By 
our valour the wild folk of the East are still restrained, and 
the terror of Morgul kept at bay; and thus alone are peace 
and freedom maintained in the lands behind us, bulwark of 
the West. But if the passages of the River should be won, 
what then? 

“Yet that hour, maybe, is not now far away. The Name- 
less Enemy has arisen again. Smoke rises once more from 
Orodruin that we call Mount Doom. The power of the Black 
Land grows and we are hard beset. When the Enemy re- 
turned our folk were driven from Ithilien, our fair domain east 
of the River, though we kept a foothold there and strength of 
arms. But this very year, in the days of June, sudden war 
came upon us out of Mordor, and we were swept away. 
We were outnumbered, for Mordor has allied itself with the 
Easterlings and the cruel Haradrim; but it was not by 


320 THE FELLOWSHIP OF THE RING 


numbers that we were defeated. A power was there that we 
have not felt before. 

‘Some said that it could be seen, like a great black horse- 
man, a dark shadow under the moon. Wherever he came a 
madness filled our foes, but fear fell on our boldest, so that 
horse and man gave way and fled. Only a remnant of our 
eastern force came back, destroying the last bridge that still 
stood amid the ruins of Osgiliath. 

‘I was in the company that held the bridge, until it was cast 
down behind us. Four only were saved by swimming: my 
brother and myself and two others. But still we fight on, 
holding all the west shores of Anduin; and those who shelter 
behind us give us praise, if ever they hear our name: much 
praise but little help. Only from Rohan now will any men 
ride to us when we call. 

‘In this evil hour I have come on an errand over many 
dangerous leagues to Elrond: a hundred and ten days I have 
journeyed all alone. But I do not seek allies in war. The might 
of Elrond is in wisdom not in weapons, it is said. I come to 
ask for counsel and the unravelling of hard words. For on the 
eve of the sudden assault a dream came to my brother in a 
troubled sleep; and afterwards a like dream came oft to him 
again, and once to me. 

‘In that dream I thought the eastern sky grew dark and 
there was a growing thunder, but in the West a pale light 
lingered, and out of it I heard a voice, remote but clear, 
crying: 


Seek for the Sword that was broken: 
In Imladris it dwells; 
There shall be counsels taken 
Stronger than Morgul-spells. 
There shall be shown a token 
That Doom 1s near at hand, 
For Isildur’s Bane shall waken, 
And the Halfling forth shall stand. 


THE COUNCIL OF ELROND 321 


Of these words we could understand little, and we spoke to 
our father, Denethor, Lord of Minas Tirith, wise in the lore 
of Gondor. This only would he say, that Imladris was of old 
the name among the Elves of a far northern dale, where 
Elrond the Halfelven dwelt, greatest of lore-masters. ‘There- 
fore my brother, seeing how desperate was our need, was 
eager to heed the dream and seek for Imladris; but since the 
way was full of doubt and danger, I took the journey upon 
myself. Loth was my father to give me leave, and long have 
I wandered by roads forgotten, seeking the house of Elrond, 
of which many had heard, but few knew where it lay.’ 


‘And here in the house of Elrond more shall be made clear 
to you,’ said Aragorn, standing up. He cast his sword upon 
the table that stood before Elrond, and the blade was in two 
pieces. “Here is the Sword that was Broken!’ he said. 

‘And who are you, and what have you to do with Minas 
Tirith?’ asked Boromir, looking in wonder at the lean face of 
the Ranger and his weather-stained cloak. 

‘He is Aragorn son of Arathorn,’ said Elrond; ‘and he is 
descended through many fathers from Isildur Elendil’s son 
of Minas Ithil. He is the Chief of the Dunedain in the North, 
and few are now left of that folk.’ 

“Then it belongs to you, and not to me at all!’ cried Frodo 
in amazement, springing to his feet, as if he expected the 
Ring to be demanded at once. 

‘Tt does not belong to either of us,’ said Aragorn; ‘but it 
has been ordained that you should hold it for a while.’ 

‘Bring out the Ring, Frodo!’ said Gandalf solemnly. “The 
time has come. Hold it up, and then Boromir will understand 
the remainder of his riddle.’ 


There was a hush, and all turned their eyes on Frodo. He 
was shaken by a sudden shame and fear; and he felt a great 
reluctance to reveal the Ring, and a loathing of its touch. He 
wished he was far away. The Ring gleamed and flickered as 
he held it up before them in his trembling hand. 


322 THE FELLOWSHIP OF THE RING 


‘Behold Isildur’s Bane!’ said Elrond. 

Boromir’s eyes glinted as he gazed at the golden thing. 
“The Halfling!’ he muttered. ‘Is then the doom of Minas Tirith 
come at last? But why then should we seek a broken sword?’ 

“The words were not the doom of Minas Tirith,’ said 
Aragorn. ‘But doom and great deeds are indeed at hand. For 
the Sword that was Broken is the Sword of Elendil that broke 
beneath him when he fell. It has been treasured by his heirs 
when all other heirlooms were lost; for it was spoken of old 
among us that it should be made again when the Ring, 
Isildur’s Bane, was found. Now you have seen the sword that 
you have sought, what would you ask? Do you wish for the 
House of Elendil to return to the Land of Gondor?’ 

‘I was not sent to beg any boon, but to seek only the 
meaning of a riddle,’ answered Boromir proudly. ‘Yet we are 
hard pressed, and the Sword of Elendil would be a help 
beyond our hope — if such a thing could indeed return out of 
the shadows of the past.’ He looked again at Aragorn, and 
doubt was in his eyes. 

Frodo felt Bilbo stir impatiently at his side. Evidently he 
was annoyed on his friend’s behalf. Standing suddenly up he 
burst out: 


All that is gold does not glitter, 
Not all those who wander are lost; 
The old that is strong does not wither, 
Deep roots are not reached by the frost. 
From the ashes a fire shall be woken, 
A light from the shadows shall spring; 
Renewed shall be blade that was broken: 
The crownless again shall be king. 


‘Not very good perhaps, but to the point — if you need more 
beyond the word of Elrond. If that was worth a journey of a 
hundred and ten days to hear, you had best listen to it.” He 
sat down with a snort. 

‘I made that up myself,’ he whispered to Frodo, ‘for the 


THE COUNCIL OF ELROND 323 


Dunadan, a long time ago when he first told me about him- 
self. I almost wish that my adventures were not over, and 
that I could go with him when his day comes.’ 

Aragorn smiled at him; then he turned to Boromir again. 
‘For my part I forgive your doubt,’ he said. ‘Little do I 
resemble the figures of Elendil and Isildur as they stand 
carven in their majesty in the halls of Denethor. I am but the 
heir of Isildur, not Isildur himself. I have had a hard life and 
a long; and the leagues that lie between here and Gondor are 
a small part in the count of my journeys. I have crossed many 
mountains and many rivers, and trodden many plains, even 
into the far countries of Rhtin and Harad where the stars are 
strange. 

‘But my home, such as I have, is in the North. For here 
the heirs of Valandil have ever dwelt in long line unbroken 
from father unto son for many generations. Our days have 
darkened, and we have dwindled; but ever the Sword has 
passed to a new keeper. And this I will say to you, Boromir, 
ere I end. Lonely men are we, Rangers of the wild, hunters 
— but hunters ever of the servants of the Enemy; for they are 
found in many places, not in Mordor only. 

‘If Gondor, Boromir, has been a stalwart tower, we have 
played another part. Many evil things there are that your 
strong walls and bright swords do not stay. You know little 
of the lands beyond your bounds. Peace and freedom, do 
you say? The North would have known them little but for 
us. Fear would have destroyed them. But when dark things 
come from the houseless hills, or creep from sunless woods, 
they fly from us. What roads would any dare to tread, what 
safety would there be in quiet lands, or in the homes of simple 
men at night, if the Dunedain were asleep, or were all gone 
into the grave? 

‘And yet less thanks have we than you. Travellers scowl at 
us, and countrymen give us scornful names. ‘‘Strider” I am 
to one fat man who lives within a day’s march of foes that 
would freeze his heart, or lay his little town in ruin, if he were 
not guarded ceaselessly. Yet we would not have it otherwise. 


324 THE FELLOWSHIP OF THE RING 


If simple folk are free from care and fear, simple they will be, 
and we must be secret to keep them so. That has been the 
task of my kindred, while the years have lengthened and the 
grass has grown. 

‘But now the world is changing once again. A new hour 
comes. Isildur’s Bane is found. Battle is at hand. The Sword 
shall be reforged. I will come to Minas ‘Tirith.’ 

‘Isildur’s Bane is found, you say,’ said Boromir. ‘I have 
seen a bright ring in the Halfling’s hand; but Isildur perished 
ere this age of the world began, they say. How do the Wise 
know that this ring is his? And how has it passed down the 
years, until it is brought hither by so strange a messenger?’ 

“That shall be told,’ said Elrond. 

‘But not yet, I beg, Master!’ cried Bilbo. ‘Already the Sun 
is climbing to noon, and I feel the need of something to 
strengthen me.’ 

‘I had not named you,’ said Elrond smiling. ‘But I do so 
now. Come! Tell us your tale. And if you have not yet cast 
your story into verse, you may tell it in plain words. The 
briefer, the sooner shall you be refreshed.’ 

‘Very well,’ said Bilbo. ‘I will do as you bid. But I will now 
tell the true story, and if some here have heard me tell it 
otherwise’ — he looked sidelong at Gldéin — ‘I ask them to 
forget it and forgive me. I only wished to claim the treasure 
as my very own in those days, and to be rid of the name of 
thief that was put on me. But perhaps I understand things a 
little better now. Anyway, this is what happened.’ 


To some there Bilbo’s tale was wholly new, and they 
listened with amazement while the old hobbit, actually not at 
all displeased, recounted his adventure with Gollum, at full 
length. He did not omit a single riddle. He would have given 
also an account of his party and disappearance from the 
Shire, if he had been allowed; but Elrond raised his hand. 

‘Well told, my friend,’ he said, “but that is enough at this 
time. For the moment it suffices to know that the Ring passed 
to Frodo, your heir. Let him now speak!’ 


THE COUNCIL OF ELROND 325 


Then, less willingly than Bilbo, Frodo told of all his deal- 
ings with the Ring from the day that it passed into his keeping. 
Every step of his journey from Hobbiton to the Ford of 
Bruinen was questioned and considered, and everything that 
he could recall concerning the Black Riders was examined. 
At last he sat down again. 

‘Not bad,’ Bilbo said to him. ‘You would have made a 
good story of it, if they hadn’t kept on interrupting. I tried to 
make a few notes, but we shall have to go over it all again 
together some time, if I am to write it up. There are whole 
chapters of stuff before you ever got here!’ 

“Yes, it made quite a long tale,’ answered Frodo. ‘But the 
story still does not seem complete to me. I still want to know 
a good deal, especially about Gandalf.’ 


Galdor of the Havens, who sat nearby, overheard him. 
“You speak for me also,’ he cried, and turning to Elrond he 
said: “The Wise may have good reason to believe that the 
halfling’s trove is indeed the Great Ring of long debate, 
unlikely though that may seem to those who know less. But 
may we not hear the proofs? And I would ask this also. What 
of Saruman? He is learned in the lore of the Rings, yet he is 
not among us. What is his counsel — if he knows the things 
that we have heard?’ 

“The questions that you ask, Galdor, are bound together,’ 
said Elrond. ‘I had not overlooked them, and they shall be 
answered. But these things it is the part of Gandalf to make 
clear; and I call upon him last, for it is the place of honour, 
and in all this matter he has been the chief.’ 

‘Some, Galdor,’ said Gandalf, ‘would think the tidings of 
Gloin, and the pursuit of Frodo, proof enough that the 
halfling’s trove is a thing of great worth to the Enemy. Yet it 
is aring. What then? The Nine the Nazgul keep. The Seven 
are taken or destroyed.’ At this Gloin stirred, but did not 
speak. “The Three we know of. What then is this one that he 
desires so much? 

“There is indeed a wide waste of time between the River 


326 THE FELLOWSHIP OF THE RING 


and the Mountain, between the loss and the finding. But the 
gap in the knowledge of the Wise has been filled at last. Yet 
too slowly. For the Enemy has been close behind, closer even 
than I feared. And well is it that not until this year, this very 
summer, as it seems, did he learn the full truth. 

‘Some here will remember that many years ago I myself 
dared to pass the doors of the Necromancer in Dol Guldur, 
and secretly explored his ways, and found thus that our fears 
were true: he was none other than Sauron, our Enemy of 
old, at length taking shape and power again. Some, too, will 
remember also that Saruman dissuaded us from open deeds 
against him, and for long we watched him only. Yet at last, 
as his shadow grew, Saruman yielded, and the Council put 
forth its strength and drove the evil out of Mirkwood — and 
that was in the very year of the finding of this Ring: a strange 
chance, if chance it was. 

‘But we were too late, as Elrond foresaw. Sauron also had 
watched us, and had long prepared against our stroke, gov- 
erning Mordor from afar through Minas Morgul, where his 
Nine servants dwelt, until all was ready. Then he gave way 
before us, but only feigned to flee, and soon after came to 
the Dark ‘Tower and openly declared himself. Then for the 
last time the Council met; for now we learned that he was 
seeking ever more eagerly for the One. We feared then that 
he had some news of it that we knew nothing of. But Saruman 
said nay, and repeated what he had said to us before: that 
the One would never again be found in Middle-earth. 

“**At the worst,” said he, “cour Enemy knows that we have 
it not, and that it still is lost. But what was lost may yet be 
found, he thinks. Fear not! His hope will cheat him. Have I 
not earnestly studied this matter? Into Anduin the Great it 
fell; and long ago, while Sauron slept, it was rolled down the 
River to the Sea. There let it lie until the End.”’’ 


Gandalf fell silent, gazing eastward from the porch to the 
far peaks of the Misty Mountains, at whose great roots the 
peril of the world had so long lain hidden. He sighed. 


THE COUNCIL OF ELROND 327 


“There I was at fault,’ he said. ‘I was lulled by the words 
of Saruman the Wise; but I should have sought for the truth 
sooner, and our peril would now be less.’ 

‘We were all at fault,’ said Elrond, ‘and but for your vigil- 
ance the Darkness, maybe, would already be upon us. But 
say on!’ 

‘From the first my heart misgave me, against all reason 
that I knew,’ said Gandalf, ‘and I desired to know how this 
thing came to Gollum, and how long he had possessed it. So 
I set a watch for him, guessing that he would ere long come 
forth from his darkness to seek for his treasure. He came, but 
he escaped and was not found. And then alas! I let the matter 
rest, watching and waiting only, as we have too often done. 

“Time passed with many cares, until my doubts were awak- 
ened again to sudden fear. Whence came the hobbit’s ring? 
What, if my fear was true, should be done with it? Those 
things I must decide. But I spoke yet of my dread to none, 
knowing the peril of an untimely whisper, if it went astray. 
In all the long wars with the Dark Tower treason has ever 
been our greatest foe. 

“That was seventeen years ago. Soon I became aware that 
spies of many sorts, even beasts and birds, were gathered 
round the Shire, and my fear grew. I called for the help of 
the Dunedain, and their watch was doubled; and I opened 
my heart to Aragorn, the heir of Isildur.’ 

‘And I,’ said Aragorn, ‘counselled that we should hunt for 
Gollum, too late though it may seem. And since it seemed fit 
that Isildur’s heir should labour to repair Isildur’s fault, I 
went with Gandalf on the long and hopeless search.’ 

Then Gandalf told how they had explored the whole length 
of Wilderland, down even to the Mountains of Shadow and 
the fences of Mordor. “There we had rumour of him, and we 
guess that he dwelt there long in the dark hills; but we never 
found him, and at last I despaired. And then in my despair I 
thought again of a test that might make the finding of Gollum 
unneeded. The ring itself might tell if it were the One. The 
memory of words at the Council came back to me: words of 


328 THE FELLOWSHIP OF THE RING 


Saruman, half-heeded at the time. I heard them now clearly 
in my heart. 

“*“The Nine, the Seven, and the Three,” he said, “Shad each 
their proper gem. Not so the One. It was round and 
unadorned, as it were one of the lesser rings; but its maker set 
marks upon it that the skilled, maybe, could still see and read.” 

‘What those marks were he had not said. Who now would 
know? The maker. And Saruman? But great though his lore 
may be, it must have a source. What hand save Sauron’s ever 
held this thing, ere it was lost? The hand of Isildur alone. 

‘With that thought, I forsook the chase, and passed swiftly 
to Gondor. In former days the members of my order had 
been well received there, but Saruman most of all. Often he 
had been for long the guest of the Lords of the City. Less 
welcome did the Lord Denethor show me then than of old, 
and grudgingly he permitted me to search among his hoarded 
scrolls and books. 

““Tf indeed you look only, as you say, for records of ancient 
days, and the beginnings of the City, read on!” he said. ‘‘For 
to me what was is less dark than what is to come, and that is 
my care. But unless you have more skill even than Saruman, 
who has studied here long, you will find naught that is not 
well known to me, who am master of the lore of this City.” 

‘So said Denethor. And yet there lie in his hoards many 
records that few even of the lore-masters now can read, for 
their scripts and tongues have become dark to later men. And 
Boromir, there lies in Minas Tirith still, unread, I guess, by 
any save Saruman and myself since the kings failed, a scroll 
that Isildur made himself. For Isildur did not march away 
straight from the war in Mordor, as some have told the tale.’ 

‘Some in the North, maybe,’ Boromir broke in. ‘All know 
in Gondor that he went first to Minas Anor and dwelt a 
while with his nephew Meneldil, instructing him, before he 
committed to him the rule of the South Kingdom. In that 
time he planted there the last sapling of the White Tree in 
memory of his brother.’ 

‘But in that time also he made this scroll,’ said Gandalf; 


THE COUNCIL OF ELROND 329 


‘and that is not remembered in Gondor, it would seem. For 
this scroll concerns the Ring, and thus wrote Isildur therein: 


The Great Ring shall go now to be an heirloom of the 
North Kingdom; but records of it shall be left in Gondor, 
where also dwell the heirs of Elendil, lest a time come when 
the memory of these great matters shall grow dim. 


‘And after these words Isildur described the Ring, such as he 
found it. 


It was hot when I first took it, hot as a glede, and my 
hand was scorched, so that I doubt tf ever again I shall be 
free of the pain of it. Yet even as I write it is cooled, and it 
seemeth to shrink, though tt loseth neither its beauty nor its 
shape. Already the writing upon it, which at first was as 
clear as red flame, fadeth and is now only barely to be 
read. It 1s fashioned in an elven-script of Eregion, for they 
have no letters in Mordor for such subtle work; but the 
language is unknown to me. I deem it to be a tongue of the 
Black Land, since it is foul and uncouth. What evil it saith 
I do not know; but I trace here a copy of it, lest it fade 
beyond recall. The Ring muisseth, maybe, the heat of 
Sauron’s hand, which was black and yet burned like fire, 
and so Gil-galad was destroyed; and maybe were the gold 
made hot again, the writing would be refreshed. But for 
my part I will risk no hurt to this thing: of all the works of 
Sauron the only fair. It 1s precious to me, though I buy it 
with great pain. 


‘When I read these words, my quest was ended. For the 
traced writing was indeed as Isildur guessed, in the tongue 
of Mordor and the servants of the Tower. And what was said 
therein was already known. For in the day that Sauron first 
put on the One, Celebrimbor, maker of the Three, was aware 
of him, and from afar he heard him speak these words, and 
so his evil purposes were revealed. 


330 THE FELLOWSHIP OF THE RING 


‘At once I took my leave of Denethor, but even as I went 
northwards, messages came to me out of Lorien that Aragorn 
had passed that way, and that he had found the creature 
called Gollum. Therefore I went first to meet him and hear 
his tale. Into what deadly perils he had gone alone I dared 
not guess.’ 

“There is little need to tell of them,’ said Aragorn. ‘If a man 
must needs walk in sight of the Black Gate, or tread the 
deadly flowers of Morgul Vale, then perils he will have. I, 
too, despaired at last, and I began my homeward journey. 
And then, by fortune, I came suddenly on what I sought: the 
marks of soft feet beside a muddy pool. But now the trail was 
fresh and swift, and it led not to Mordor but away. Along the 
skirts of the Dead Marshes I followed it, and then I had him. 
Lurking by a stagnant mere, peering in the water as the dark 
eve fell, I caught him, Gollum. He was covered with green 
slime. He will never love me, I fear; for he bit me, and I was 
not gentle. Nothing more did I ever get from his mouth than 
the marks of his teeth. I deemed it the worst part of all my 
journey, the road back, watching him day and night, making 
him walk before me with a halter on his neck, gagged, until 
he was tamed by lack of drink and food, driving him ever 
towards Mirkwood. I brought him there at last and gave him 
to the Elves, for we had agreed that this should be done; and 
I was glad to be rid of his company, for he stank. For my 
part I hope never to look upon him again; but Gandalf came 
and endured long speech with him.’ 

‘Yes, long and weary,’ said Gandalf, ‘but not without 
profit. For one thing, the tale he told of his loss agreed with 
that which Bilbo has now told openly for the first time; but 
that mattered little, since I had already guessed it. But I 
learned then first that Gollum’s ring came out of the Great 
River nigh to the Gladden Fields. And I learned also that he 
had possessed it long. Many lives of his small kind. The 
power of the ring had lengthened his years far beyond their 
span; but that power only the Great Rings wield. 

‘And if that is not proof enough, Galdor, there is the other 


THE COUNCIL OF ELROND 331 


test that I spoke of. Upon this very ring which you have here 
seen held aloft, round and unadorned, the letters that Isildur 
reported may still be read, if one has the strength of will to 
set the golden thing in the fire a while. That I have done, and 
this I have read: 


Ash nazg durbatuliik, ash nazg gimbatul, ash nazg 
thrakatulitk agh burzum-ishi krimpatul.’ 


The change in the wizard’s voice was astounding. Sud- 
denly it became menacing, powerful, harsh as stone. A 
shadow seemed to pass over the high sun, and the porch for 
a moment grew dark. All trembled, and the Elves stopped 
their ears. 

‘Never before has any voice dared to utter words of that 
tongue in Imladris, Gandalf the Grey,’ said Elrond, as the 
shadow passed and the company breathed once more. 

‘And let us hope that none will ever speak it here again,’ 
answered Gandalf. ‘Nonetheless I do not ask your pardon, 
Master Elrond. For if that tongue is not soon to be heard in 
every corner of the West, then let all put doubt aside that this 
thing is indeed what the Wise have declared: the treasure of 
the Enemy, fraught with all his malice; and in it lies a great 
part of his strength of old. Out of the Black Years come the 
words that the Smiths of Eregion heard, and knew that they 
had been betrayed: 


One Ring to rule them all, One Ring to find them, One Ring 
to bring them all and in the Darkness bind them. 


‘Know also, my friends, that I learned more yet from 
Gollum. He was loth to speak and his tale was unclear, but 
it is beyond all doubt that he went to Mordor, and there all 
that he knew was forced from him. Thus the Enemy knows 
now that the One is found, that it was long in the Shire; and 
since his servants have pursued it almost to our door, he soon 


332 THE FELLOWSHIP OF THE RING 


will know, already he may know, even as I speak, that we 
have it here.’ 


All sat silent for a while, until at length Boromir spoke. ‘He 
is a small thing, you say, this Gollum? Small, but great in 
mischief. What became of him? To what doom did you put 
him?’ 

‘He is in prison, but no worse,’ said Aragorn. ‘He had 
suffered much. There is no doubt that he was tormented, 
and the fear of Sauron lies black on his heart. Still I for 
one am glad that he is safely kept by the watchful Elves of 
Mirkwood. His malice is great and gives him a strength hardly 
to be believed in one so lean and withered. He could work 
much mischief still, if he were free. And I do not doubt that 
he was allowed to leave Mordor on some evil errand.’ 

‘Alas! alas!’ cried Legolas, and in his fair Elvish face there 
was great distress. “The tidings that I was sent to bring must 
now be told. They are not good, but only here have I learned 
how evil they may seem to this company. Sméagol, who is 
now called Gollum, has escaped.’ 

‘Escaped?’ cried Aragorn. “That is ill news indeed. We 
shall all rue it bitterly, I fear. How came the folk of Thranduil 
to fail in their trust?’ 

‘Not through lack of watchfulness,’ said Legolas; “but per- 
haps through over-kindliness. And we fear that the prisoner 
had aid from others, and that more is known of our doings 
than we could wish. We guarded this creature day and night, 
at Gandalf’s bidding, much though we wearied of the task. 
But Gandalf bade us hope still for his cure, and we had not 
the heart to keep him ever in dungeons under the earth, 
where he would fall back into his old black thoughts.’ 

“You were less tender to me,’ said Glin with a flash of his 
eyes, as old memories were stirred of his imprisonment in 
the deep places of the Elven-king’s halls. 

‘Now come!’ said Gandalf. ‘Pray, do not interrupt, my 
good Gloin. That was a regrettable misunderstanding, long 
set right. If all the grievances that stand between Elves and 


THE COUNCIL OF ELROND 333 


Dwarves are to be brought up here, we may as well abandon 
this Council.’ 

Gldin rose and bowed, and Legolas continued. ‘In the days 
of fair weather we led Gollum through the woods; and there 
was a high tree standing alone far from the others which he 
liked to climb. Often we let him mount up to the highest 
branches, until he felt the free wind; but we set a guard at 
the tree’s foot. One day he refused to come down, and the 
guards had no mind to climb after him: he had learned the 
trick of clinging to boughs with his feet as well as with his 
hands; so they sat by the tree far into the night. 

‘It was that very night of summer, yet moonless and star- 
less, that Orcs came on us at unawares. We drove them off 
after some time; they were many and fierce, but they came 
from over the mountains, and were unused to the woods. 
When the battle was over, we found that Gollum was gone, 
and his guards were slain or taken. It then seemed plain to us 
that the attack had been made for his rescue, and that he knew 
of it beforehand. How that was contrived we cannot guess; but 
Gollum is cunning, and the spies of the Enemy are many. The 
dark things that were driven out in the year of the Dragon’s fall 
have returned in greater numbers, and Mirkwood is again an 
evil place, save where our realm is maintained. 

‘We have failed to recapture Gollum. We came on his trail 
among those of many Orcs, and it plunged deep into the 
Forest, going south. But ere long it escaped our skill, and we 
dared not continue the hunt; for we were drawing nigh to Dol 
Guldur, and thatis still a very evil place; we do not go that way.’ 

‘Well, well, he is gone,’ said Gandalf. “We have no time to 
seek for him again. He must do what he will. But he may 
play a part yet that neither he nor Sauron have foreseen. 

‘And now I will answer Galdor’s other questions. What of 
Saruman? What are his counsels to us in this need? This tale 
I must tell in full, for only Elrond has heard it yet, and that 
in brief; but it will bear on all that we must resolve. It is the 
last chapter in the Tale of the Ring, so far as it has yet gone. 

ok * ok 


334 THE FELLOWSHIP OF THE RING 


‘At the end of June I was in the Shire, but a cloud of anxiety 
was on my mind, and I rode to the southern borders of the 
little land; for I had a foreboding of some danger, still hidden 
from me but drawing near. There messages reached me tell- 
ing me of war and defeat in Gondor, and when I heard of 
the Black Shadow a chill smote my heart. But I found nothing 
save a few fugitives from the South; yet it seemed to me that 
on them sat a fear of which they would not speak. I turned 
then east and north and journeyed along the Greenway; and 
not far from Bree I came upon a traveller sitting on a bank 
beside the road with his grazing horse beside him. It was 
Radagast the Brown, who at one time dwelt at Rhosgobel, 
near the borders of Mirkwood. He is one of my order, but I 
had not seen him for many a year. 

““Gandalf!”’ he cried. “I was seeking you. But I am a 
stranger in these parts. All I knew was that you might be 
found in a wild region with the uncouth name of Shire.” 

‘**Your information was correct,” I said. ““But do not put 
it that way, if you meet any of the inhabitants. You are near 
the borders of the Shire now. And what do you want with 
me? It must be pressing. You were never a traveller, unless 
driven by great need.”’ 

‘““T have an urgent errand,”’ he said. ‘““My news is evil.” 
Then he looked about him, as if the hedges might have ears. 
“Nazgul,” he whispered. ““The Nine are abroad again. They 
have crossed the River secretly and are moving westward. 
They have taken the guise of riders in black.” 

‘T knew then what I had dreaded without knowing it. 

““"The Enemy must have some great need or purpose,” 
said Radagast; “‘but what it is that makes him look to these 
distant and desolate parts, I cannot guess.”’ 

‘“What do you mean?” said I. 

““T have been told that wherever they go the Riders ask for 
news of a land called Shire.” 

‘The Shire,” I said; but my heart sank. For even the Wise 
might fear to withstand the Nine, when they are gathered 
together under their fell chieftain. A great king and sorcerer 


THE COUNCIL OF ELROND 335 


he was of old, and now he wields a deadly fear. ““Who told 
you, and who sent your” I asked. 

““Saruman the White,” answered Radagast. “And he told 
me to say that if you feel the need, he will help; but you must 
seek his aid at once, or it will be too late.” 

‘And that message brought me hope. For Saruman the 
White is the greatest of my order. Radagast is, of course, a 
worthy Wizard, a master of shapes and changes of hue; and 
he has much lore of herbs and beasts, and birds are especially 
his friends. But Saruman has long studied the arts of the 
Enemy himself, and thus we have often been able to forestall 
him. It was by the devices of Saruman that we drove him from 
Dol Guldur. It might be that he had found some weapons that 
would drive back the Nine. 

*“T will go to Saruman,”’ I said. 

““Then you must go now,” said Radagast; “‘for I have 
wasted time in looking for you, and the days are running 
short. I was told to find you before Midsummer, and that is 
now here. Even if you set out from this spot, you will hardly 
reach him before the Nine discover the land that they seek. I 
myself shall turn back at once.’’ And with that he mounted 
and would have ridden straight off. 

“Stay a moment!” I said. ““We shall need your help, and 
the help of all things that will give it. Send out messages to 
all the beasts and birds that are your friends. Tell them to 
bring news of anything that bears on this matter to Sar'uman 
and Gandalf. Let messages be sent to Orthanc.”’ 

‘“T will do that,” he said, and rode off as if the Nine were 
after him. 


‘IT could not follow him then and there. I had ridden very 
far already that day, and I was as weary as my horse; and I 
needed to consider matters. I stayed the night in Bree, and 
decided that I had no time to return to the Shire. Never did 
I make a greater mistake! 

‘However, I wrote a message to Frodo, and trusted to my 
friend the innkeeper to send it to him. I rode away at dawn; 


336 THE FELLOWSHIP OF THE RING 


and I came at long last to the dwelling of Saruman. That is 
far south in Isengard, in the end of the Misty Mountains, not 
far from the Gap of Rohan. And Boromir will tell you that 
that is a great open vale that lies between the Misty Mountains 
and the northmost foothills of Ered Nimrais, the White 
Mountains of his home. But Isengard is a circle of sheer rocks 
that enclose a valley as with a wall, and in the midst of that 
valley is a tower of stone called Orthanc. It was not made by 
Saruman, but by the Men of Numenor long ago; and it is 
very tall and has many secrets; yet it looks not to be a work 
of craft. It cannot be reached save by passing the circle of 
Isengard; and in that circle there is only one gate. 

‘Late one evening I came to the gate, like a great arch in 
the wall of rock; and it was strongly guarded. But the keepers 
of the gate were on the watch for me and told me that 
Saruman awaited me. I rode under the arch, and the gate 
closed silently behind me, and suddenly I was afraid, though 
I knew no reason for it. 

‘But I rode to the foot of Orthanc, and came to the stair of 
Saruman; and there he met me and led me up to his high 
chamber. He wore a ring on his finger. 

“*So you have come, Gandalf,” he said to me gravely; but 
in his eyes there seemed to be a white light, as if a cold 
laughter was in his heart. 

“Yes, I have come,” I said. “I have come for your aid, 
Saruman the White.” And that title seemed to anger him. 

“““Have you indeed, Gandalf the Grey!” he scoffed. “For 
aid? It has seldom been heard of that Gandalf the Grey sought 
for aid, one so cunning and so wise, wandering about the 
lands, and concerning himself in every business, whether it 
belongs to him or not.” 

‘I looked at him and wondered. “‘But if I am not deceived,” 
said I, ‘‘things are now moving which will require the union 
of all our strength.” 

“That may be so,” he said, “‘but the thought is late in 
coming to you. How long, I wonder, have you concealed 
from me, the head of the Council, a matter of greatest import? 


THE COUNCIL OF ELROND 337 


What brings you now from your lurking-place in the Shire?” 

“““The Nine have come forth again,”’ I answered. ‘““They 
have crossed the River. So Radagast said to me.” 

‘“Radagast the Brown!” laughed Saruman, and he no 
longer concealed his scorn. “‘“Radagast the Bird-tamer! Rada- 
gast the Simple! Radagast the Fool! Yet he had just the wit 
to play the part that I set him. For you have come, and that 
was all the purpose of my message. And here you will stay, 
Gandalf the Grey, and rest from journeys. For Iam Saruman 
the Wise, Saruman Ring-maker, Saruman of Many Colours!”’ 

‘I looked then and saw that his robes, which had seemed 
white, were not so, but were woven of all colours, and if he 
moved they shimmered and changed hue so that the eye was 
bewildered. 

‘“T liked white better,”’ I said. 

““White!”’ he sneered. ‘It serves as a beginning. White 
cloth may be dyed. The white page can be overwritten; and 
the white light can be broken.” 

‘“Tn which case it is no longer white,”’ said I. ‘“And he that 
breaks a thing to find out what it is has left the path of 
wisdom.” 

“You need not speak to me as to one of the fools that you 
take for friends,” said he. “I have not brought you hither to 
be instructed by you, but to give you a choice.” 

‘He drew himself up then and began to declaim, as if he 
were making a speech long rehearsed. ‘“The Elder Days are 
gone. The Middle Days are passing. The Younger Days are 
beginning. The time of the Elves is over, but our time is at 
hand: the world of Men, which we must rule. But we must 
have power, power to order all things as we will, for that good 
which only the Wise can see. 

““And listen, Gandalf, my old friend and helper!”’ he said, 
coming near and speaking now in a softer voice. “I said we, 
for we it may be, if you will join with me. A new Power is 
rising. Against it the old allies and policies will not avail us at 
all. There is no hope left in Elves or dying Numenor. This 
then is one choice before you, before us. We may join with 


338 THE FELLOWSHIP OF THE RING 


that Power. It would be wise, Gandalf. There is hope that 
way. Its victory is at hand; and there will be rich reward for 
those that aided it. As the Power grows, its proved friends 
will also grow; and the Wise, such as you and I, may with 
patience come at last to direct its courses, to control it. We 
can bide our time, we can keep our thoughts in our hearts, 
deploring maybe evils done by the way, but approving the 
high and ultimate purpose: Knowledge, Rule, Order; all the 
things that we have so far striven in vain to accomplish, 
hindered rather than helped by our weak or idle friends. 
There need not be, there would not be, any real change in 
our designs, only in our means.” 

**Saruman,”’ I said, “I have heard speeches of this kind 
before, but only in the mouths of emissaries sent from 
Mordor to deceive the ignorant. I cannot think that you 
brought me so far only to weary my ears.” 

‘He looked at me sidelong, and paused a while considering. 
“Well, I see that this wise course does not commend itself 
to you,” he said. ‘““Not yet? Not if some better way can be 
contrived?” 

‘He came and laid his long hand on my arm. “And why 
not, Gandalf?” he whispered. ““Why not? The Ruling Ring? 
If we could command that, then the Power would pass to us. 
That is in truth why I brought you here. For I have many 
eyes in my service, and I believe that you know where this 
precious thing now lies. Is it not sop Or why do the Nine ask 
for the Shire, and what is your business there?”’ As he said 
this a lust which he could not conceal shone suddenly in his 
eyes. 

““Saruman,” I said, standing away from him, ‘‘only one 
hand at a time can wield the One, and you know that well, 
so do not trouble to say we! But I would not give it, nay, I 
would not give even news of it to you, now that I learn your 
mind. You were head of the Council, but you have unmasked 
yourself at last. Well, the choices are, it seems, to submit to 
Sauron, or to yourself. I will take neither. Have you others to 
offer?”’ 


THE COUNCIL OF ELROND 339 


‘He was cold now and perilous. “‘Yes,”’ he said. ‘I did not 
expect you to show wisdom, even in your own behalf; but 
I gave you the chance of aiding me willingly, and so saving 
yourself much trouble and pain. The third choice is to stay 
here, until the end.” 

‘Until what end?” 

““Until you reveal to me where the One may be found. I 
may find means to persuade you. Or until it is found in your 
despite, and the Ruler has time to turn to lighter matters: to 
devise, say, a fitting reward for the hindrance and insolence 
of Gandalf the Grey.” 

“That may not prove to be one of the lighter matters,” 
said I. He laughed at me, for my words were empty, and he 
knew it. 


“They took me and they set me alone on the pinnacle of 
Orthanc, in the place where Saruman was accustomed to 
watch the stars. There is no descent save by a narrow stair 
of many thousand steps, and the valley below seems far away. 
I looked on it and saw that, whereas it had once been green 
and fair, it was now filled with pits and forges. Wolves and 
orcs were housed in Isengard, for Saruman was mustering a 
great force on his own account, in rivalry of Sauron and not 
in his service, yet. Over all his works a dark smoke hung and 
wrapped itself about the sides of Orthanc. I stood alone on 
an island in the clouds; and I had no chance of escape, and 
my days were bitter. I was pierced with cold, and I had but 
little room in which to pace to and fro, brooding on the 
coming of the Riders to the North. 

“That the Nine had indeed arisen I felt assured, apart from 
the words of Saruman which might be lies. Long ere I came 
to Isengard I had heard tidings by the way that could not be 
mistaken. Fear was ever in my heart for my friends in the 
Shire; but still I had some hope. I hoped that Frodo had set 
forth at once, as my letter had urged, and that he had reached 
Rivendell before the deadly pursuit began. And both my fear 
and my hope proved ill-founded. For my hope was founded 


340 THE FELLOWSHIP OF THE RING 


on a fat man in Bree; and my fear was founded on the 
cunning of Sauron. But fat men who sell ale have many calls 
to answer; and the power of Sauron is still less than fear 
makes it. But in the circle of Isengard, trapped and alone, it 
was not easy to think that the hunters before whom all have 
fled or fallen would falter in the Shire far away.’ 

‘I saw you!’ cried Frodo. ‘You were walking backwards 
and forwards. The moon shone in your hair.’ 

Gandalf paused astonished and looked at him. ‘It was only 
a dream,’ said Frodo, ‘but it suddenly came back to me. I 
had quite forgotten it. It came some time ago; after I left the 
Shire, I think.’ 

“Then it was late in coming,’ said Gandalf, ‘as you will see. 
I was in an evil plight. And those who know me will agree 
that I have seldom been in such need, and do not bear such 
misfortune well. Gandalf the Grey caught like a fly in a spi- 
der’s treacherous web! Yet even the most subtle spiders may 
leave a weak thread. 

‘At first I feared, as Saruman no doubt intended, that Rada- 
gast had also fallen. Yet I had caught no hint of anything 
wrong in his voice or in his eye at our meeting. If I had, I 
should never have gone to Isengard, or I should have gone 
more warily. So Saruman guessed, and he had concealed 
his mind and deceived his messenger. It would have been 
useless in any case to try and win over the honest Radagast 
to treachery. He sought me in good faith, and so persuaded 
me. 

“That was the undoing of Saruman’s plot. For Radagast 
knew no reason why he should not do as I asked; and he rode 
away towards Mirkwood where he had many friends of old. 
And the Eagles of the Mountains went far and wide, and they 
saw many things: the gathering of wolves and the mustering 
of Orcs; and the Nine Riders going hither and thither in the 
lands; and they heard news of the escape of Gollum. And 
they sent a messenger to bring these tidings to me. 

‘So it was that when summer waned, there came a night 
of moon, and Gwaihir the Windlord, swiftest of the Great 


THE COUNCIL OF ELROND 341 


Eagles, came unlooked-for to Orthanc; and he found me 
standing on the pinnacle. Then I spoke to him and he bore 
me away, before Saruman was aware. I was far from Isengard, 
ere the wolves and orcs issued from the gate to pursue me. 

‘*FYow far can you bear me?” I said to Gwaihir. 

““Many leagues,” said he, “but not to the ends of the 
earth. I was sent to bear tidings not burdens.” 

‘**Then I must have a steed on land,” I said, ‘‘and a steed 
surpassingly swift, for I have never had such need of haste 
before.” 

‘*“Then I will bear you to Edoras, where the Lord of Rohan 
sits in his halls,”’ he said; “‘for that is not very far off.’’ And I 
was glad, for in the Riddermark of Rohan the Rohirrim, the 
Horse-lords, dwell, and there are no horses like those that are 
bred in that great vale between the Misty Mountains and the 
White. 

“*Are the Men of Rohan still to be trusted, do you think?” 
I said to Gwaihir, for the treason of Saruman had shaken my 
faith. 

“““They pay a tribute of horses,’ he answered, ‘‘and send 
many yearly to Mordor, or so it is said; but they are not yet 
under the yoke. But if Saruman has become evil, as you say, 
then their doom cannot be long delayed.” 


‘He set me down in the land of Rohan ere dawn; and now 
I have lengthened my tale over long. The rest must be more 
brief. In Rohan I found evil already at work: the lies of 
Saruman; and the king of the land would not listen to my 
warnings. He bade me take a horse and be gone; and I chose 
one much to my liking, but little to his. I took the best horse 
in his land, and I have never seen the like of him.’ 

“Then he must be a noble beast indeed,’ said Aragorn; ‘and 
it grieves me more than many tidings that might seem worse 
to learn that Sauron levies such tribute. It was not so when 
last I was in that land.’ 

‘Nor is it now, I will swear,’ said Boromir. ‘It is a lie that 
comes from the Enemy. I know the Men of Rohan, true and 


342 THE FELLOWSHIP OF THE RING 


valiant, our allies, dwelling still in the lands that we gave them 
long ago.’ 

“The shadow of Mordor lies on distant lands,’ answered 
Aragorn. ‘Saruman has fallen under it. Rohan is beset. Who 
knows what you will find there, if ever you return?’ 

‘Not this at least,’ said Boromir, ‘that they will buy their 
lives with horses. They love their horses next to their kin. 
And not without reason, for the horses of the Riddermark 
come from the fields of the North, far from the Shadow, and 
their race, as that of their masters, is descended from the free 
days of old.’ 

“True indeed!’ said Gandalf. ‘And there is one among them 
that might have been foaled in the morning of the world. The 
horses of the Nine cannot vie with him; tireless, swift as the 
flowing wind. Shadowfax they called him. By day his coat 
glistens like silver; and by night it is like a shade, and he 
passes unseen. Light is his footfall! Never before had any 
man mounted him, but I took him and I tamed him, and so 
speedily he bore me that I reached the Shire when Frodo was 
on the Barrow-downs, though I set out from Rohan only 
when he set out from Hobbiton. 

‘But fear grew in me as I rode. Ever as I came north I 
heard tidings of the Riders, and though I gained on them day 
by day, they were ever before me. They had divided their 
forces, I learned: some remained on the eastern borders, not 
far from the Greenway, and some invaded the Shire from the 
south. I came to Hobbiton and Frodo had gone; but I had 
words with old Gamgee. Many words and few to the point. 
He had much to say about the shortcomings of the new 
owners of Bag End. 

““T can’t abide changes,” said he, ‘“‘not at my time of life, 
and least of all changes for the worst.” “‘Changes for the 
worst,” he repeated many times. 

‘“Worst is a bad word,” I said to him, “‘and I hope you do 
not live to see it.”” But amidst his talk I gathered at last that 
Frodo had left Hobbiton less than a week before, and that a 
black horseman had come to the Hill the same evening. Then 


THE COUNCIL OF ELROND 343 


IT rode on in fear. I came to Buckland and found it in uproar, 
as busy as a hive of ants that has been stirred with a stick. I 
came to the house at Crickhollow, and it was broken open 
and empty; but on the threshold there lay a cloak that had 
been Frodo’s. Then for a while hope left me, and I did not 
wait to gather news, or I might have been comforted; but I 
rode on the trail of the Riders. It was hard to follow, for it 
went many ways, and I was at a loss. But it seemed to me 
that one or two had ridden towards Bree; and that way I went, 
for I thought of words that might be said to the innkeeper. 

‘““Butterbur they call him,” thought I. “If this delay 
was his fault, I will melt all the butter in him. I will roast the 
old fool over a slow fire.” He expected no less, and when 
he saw my face he fell down flat and began to melt on the 
spot.’ 

‘What did you do to him?’ cried Frodo in alarm. ‘He was 
really very kind to us and did all that he could.’ 

Gandalf laughed. ‘Don’t be afraid!’ he said. ‘I did not bite, 
and I barked very little. So overjoyed was I by the news that 
I got out of him, when he stopped quaking, that I embraced 
the old fellow. How it had happened I could not then guess, 
but I learned that you had been in Bree the night before, and 
had gone off that morning with Strider. 

“Strider!” I cried, shouting for joy. 

““Yes, sir, I am afraid so, sir,” said Butterbur, mistaking 
me. ‘‘He got at them, in spite of all that I could do, and they 
took up with him. They behaved very queer all the time they 
were here: wilful, you might say.” 

“*Ass! Fool! Thrice worthy and beloved Barliman!”’ said I. 
“It’s the best news I have had since Midsummer; it’s worth 
a gold piece at the least. May your beer be laid under an 
enchantment of surpassing excellence for seven years!” said 
I. “Now I can take a night’s rest, the first since I have forgot- 
ten when.” 


‘So I stayed there that night, wondering much what had 
become of the Riders; for only of two had there yet been any 


344 THE FELLOWSHIP OF THE RING 


news in Bree, it seemed. But in the night we heard more. 
Five at least came from the west, and they threw down the 
gates and passed through Bree like a howling wind; and 
the Bree-folk are still shivering and expecting the end of the 
world. I got up before dawn and went after them. 

‘I do not know, but it seems clear to me that this is what 
happened. Their Captain remained in secret away south of 
Bree, while two rode ahead through the village, and four 
more invaded the Shire. But when these were foiled in Bree 
and at Crickhollow, they returned to their Captain with tid- 
ings, and so left the Road unguarded for a while, except by 
their spies. The Captain then sent some eastward straight 
across country, and he himself with the rest rode along the 
Road in great wrath. 

‘T galloped to Weathertop like a gale, and I reached it before 
sundown on my second day from Bree — and they were there 
before me. They drew away from me, for they felt the coming 
of my anger and they dared not face it while the Sun was in 
the sky. But they closed round at night, and I was besieged 
on the hill-top, in the old ring of Amon Stl. I was hard put 
to it indeed: such light and flame cannot have been seen on 
Weathertop since the war-beacons of old. 

‘At sunrise I escaped and fled towards the north. I could 
not hope to do more. It was impossible to find you, Frodo, 
in the wilderness, and it would have been folly to try with all 
the Nine at my heels. So I had to trust to Aragorn. But I 
hoped to draw some of them off, and yet reach Rivendell 
ahead of you and send out help. Four Riders did indeed 
follow me, but they turned back after a while and made for 
the Ford, it seems. That helped a little, for there were only 
five, not nine, when your camp was attacked. 

‘T reached here at last by a long hard road, up the Hoarwell 
and through the Ettenmoors, and down from the north. It 
took me nearly fifteen days from Weathertop, for I could 
not ride among the rocks of the troll-fells, and Shadowfax 
departed. I sent him back to his master; but a great friendship 
has grown between us, and if I have need he will come at my 


THE COUNCIL OF ELROND 345 


call. But so it was that I came to Rivendell only two days 
before the Ring, and news of its peril had already been 
brought here — which proved well indeed. 

‘And that, Frodo, is the end of my account. May Elrond 
and the others forgive the length of it. But such a thing has 
not happened before, that Gandalf broke tryst and did not 
come when he promised. An account to the Ring-bearer of 
so strange an event was required, I think. 

‘Well, the Tale is now told, from first to last. Here we all 
are, and here is the Ring. But we have not yet come any 
nearer to our purpose. What shall we do with it?’ 


There was a silence. At last Elrond spoke again. 

“This is grievous news concerning Saruman,’ he said; ‘for 
we trusted him and he is deep in all our counsels. It is perilous 
to study too deeply the arts of the Enemy, for good or for ill. 
But such falls and betrayals, alas, have happened before. Of 
the tales that we have heard this day the tale of Frodo was 
most strange to me. I have known few hobbits, save Bilbo 
here; and it seems to me that he is perhaps not so alone and 
singular as I had thought him. The world has changed much 
since I last was on the westward roads. 

“The Barrow-wights we know by many names; and of the 
Old Forest many tales have been told: all that now remains 
is but an outlier of its northern march. Time was when a 
squirrel could go from tree to tree from what is now the Shire 
to Dunland west of Isengard. In those lands I journeyed once, 
and many things wild and strange I knew. But I had forgotten 
Bombadil, if indeed this is still the same that walked the 
woods and hills long ago, and even then was older than the 
old. That was not then his name. Iarwain Ben-adar we called 
him, oldest and fatherless. But many another name he has 
since been given by other folk: Forn by the Dwarves, Orald 
by Northern Men, and other names beside. He is a strange 
creature, but maybe I should have summoned him to our 
Council.’ 

‘He would not have come,’ said Gandalf. 


346 THE FELLOWSHIP OF THE RING 


‘Could we not still send messages to him and obtain his 
help?’ asked Erestor. ‘It seems that he has a power even over 
the Ring.’ 

‘No, I should not put it so,’ said Gandalf. ‘Say rather that 
the Ring has no power over him. He is his own master. But 
he cannot alter the Ring itself, nor break its power over others. 
And now he is withdrawn into a little land, within bounds 
that he has set, though none can see them, waiting perhaps 
for a change of days, and he will not step beyond them.’ 

‘But within those bounds nothing seems to dismay him,’ 
said Erestor. ‘Would he not take the Ring and keep it there, 
for ever harmless?’ 

‘No,’ said Gandalf, ‘not willingly. He might do so, if all the 
free folk of the world begged him, but he would not under- 
stand the need. And if he were given the Ring, he would soon 
forget it, or most likely throw it away. Such things have no 
hold on his mind. He would be a most unsafe guardian; and 
that alone is answer enough.’ 

‘But in any case,’ said Glorfindel, ‘to send the Ring to him 
would only postpone the day of evil. He is far away. We 
could not now take it back to him, unguessed, unmarked by 
any spy. And even if we could, soon or late the Lord of the 
Rings would learn of its hiding place and would bend all his 
power towards it. Could that power be defied by Bombadil 
alone? I think not. I think that in the end, if all else is con- 
quered, Bombadil will fall, Last as he was First; and then 
Night will come.’ 

‘I know little of Iarwain save the name,’ said Galdor; ‘but 
Glorfindel, I think, is right. Power to defy our Enemy is not 
in him, unless such power is in the earth itself. And yet we 
see that Sauron can torture and destroy the very hills. 
What power still remains lies with us, here in Imladris, or 
with Cirdan at the Havens, or in Lorien. But have they the 
strength, have we here the strength to withstand the Enemy, 
the coming of Sauron at the last, when all else is overthrown?’ 

‘I have not the strength,’ said Elrond; ‘neither have they.’ 

“Then if the Ring cannot be kept from him for ever by 


THE COUNCIL OF ELROND 347 


strength,’ said Glorfindel, ‘two things only remain for us to 
attempt: to send it over the Sea, or to destroy it.’ 

‘But Gandalf has revealed to us that we cannot destroy it 
by any craft that we here possess,’ said Elrond. ‘And they 
who dwell beyond the Sea would not receive it: for good or 
ill it belongs to Middle-earth; it is for us who still dwell here 
to deal with it.’ 

“Then,’ said Glorfindel, ‘let us cast it into the deeps, and 
so make the lies of Saruman come true. For it is clear now 
that even at the Council his feet were already on a crooked 
path. He knew that the Ring was not lost for ever, but wished 
us to think so; for he began to lust for it for himself. Yet oft 
in lies truth is hidden: in the Sea it would be safe.’ 

‘Not safe for ever,’ said Gandalf. “Chere are many things 
in the deep waters; and seas and lands may change. And it is 
not our part here to take thought only for a season, or for a 
few lives of Men, or for a passing age of the world. We should 
seek a final end of this menace, even if we do not hope to 
make one.’ 

‘And that we shall not find on the roads to the Sea,’ said 
Galdor. ‘If the return to Jarwain be thought too dangerous, 
then flight to the Sea is now fraught with gravest peril. My 
heart tells me that Sauron will expect us to take the western 
way, when he learns what has befallen. He soon will. The 
Nine have been unhorsed indeed, but that is but a respite, 
ere they find new steeds and swifter. Only the waning might 
of Gondor stands now between him and a march in power 
along the coasts into the North; and if he comes, assailing 
the White Towers and the Havens, hereafter the Elves may 
have no escape from the lengthening shadows of Middle- 
earth.’ 

‘Long yet will that march be delayed,’ said Boromir. 
‘Gondor wanes, you say. But Gondor stands, and even the 
end of its strength is still very strong.’ 

‘And yet its vigilance can no longer keep back the Nine,’ 
said Galdor. ‘And other roads he may find that Gondor does 
not guard.’ 


348 THE FELLOWSHIP OF THE RING 


“Then,’ said Erestor, ‘there are but two courses, as Glor- 
findel already has declared: to hide the Ring for ever; or to 
unmake it. But both are beyond our power. Who will read 
this riddle for us?’ 

‘None here can do so,’ said Elrond gravely. ‘At least none 
can foretell what will come to pass, if we take this road or 
that. But it seems to me now clear which is the road that we 
must take. The westward road seems easiest. Therefore it 
must be shunned. It will be watched. Too often the Elves 
have fled that way. Now at this last we must take a hard road, 
a road unforeseen. There lies our hope, if hope it be. To walk 
into peril — to Mordor. We must send the Ring to the Fire.’ 


Silence fell again. Frodo, even in that fair house, looking 
out upon a sunlit valley filled with the noise of clear waters, 
felt a dead darkness in his heart. Boromir stirred, and Frodo 
looked at him. He was fingering his great horn and frowning. 
At length he spoke. 

‘I do not understand all this,’ he said. ‘Saruman is a traitor, 
but did he not have a glimpse of wisdom? Why do you speak 
ever of hiding and destroying? Why should we not think that 
the Great Ring has come into our hands to serve us in the 
very hour of need? Wielding it the Free Lords of the Free 
may surely defeat the Enemy. That is what he most fears, 
I deem. 

“The Men of Gondor are valiant, and they will never sub- 
mit; but they may be beaten down. Valour needs first 
strength, and then a weapon. Let the Ring be your weapon, 
if it has such power as you say. Take it and go forth to 
victory!’ 

‘Alas, no,’ said Elrond. ‘We cannot use the Ruling Ring. 
That we now know too well. It belongs to Sauron and was 
made by him alone, and is altogether evil. Its strength, 
Boromir, is too great for anyone to wield at will, save only 
those who have already a great power of their own. But for 
them it holds an even deadlier peril. The very desire of it 
corrupts the heart. Consider Saruman. If any of the Wise 


THE COUNCIL OF ELROND 349 


should with this Ring overthrow the Lord of Mordor, using 
his own arts, he would then set himself on Sauron’s throne, 
and yet another Dark Lord would appear. And that is another 
reason why the Ring should be destroyed: as long as it is in 
the world it will be a danger even to the Wise. For nothing is 
evil in the beginning. Even Sauron was not so. I fear to take 
the Ring to hide it. I will not take the Ring to wield it.’ 

‘Nor I,’ said Gandalf. 

Boromir looked at them doubtfully, but he bowed his head. 
‘So be it,’ he said. “Then in Gondor we must trust to such 
weapons as we have. And at the least, while the Wise ones 
guard this Ring, we will fight on. Mayhap the Sword-that- 
was-Broken may still stem the tide — if the hand that wields 
it has inherited not an heirloom only, but the sinews of the 
Kings of Men.’ 

‘Who can tell?’ said Aragorn. ‘But we will put it to the test 
one day.’ 

‘May the day not be too long delayed,’ said Boromir. ‘For 
though I do not ask for aid, we need it. It would comfort us 
to know that others fought also with all the means that they 
have.’ 

“Then be comforted,’ said Elrond. ‘For there are other 
powers and realms that you know not, and they are hidden 
from you. Anduin the Great flows past many shores, ere it 
comes to Argonath and the Gates of Gondor.’ 

‘Still it might be well for all,’ said Gloin the Dwarf, ‘if all 
these strengths were joined, and the powers of each were 
used in league. Other rings there may be, less treacherous, 
that might be used in our need. The Seven are lost to us — if 
Balin has not found the ring of Thror, which was the last; 
naught has been heard of it since Thror perished in Moria. 
Indeed I may now reveal that it was partly in hope to find 
that ring that Balin went away.’ 

‘Balin will find no ring in Moria,’ said Gandalf. “Thror 
gave it to Thrain his son, but not Thrain to Thorin. It was 
taken with torment from Thrain in the dungeons of Dol 
Guldur. I came too late.’ 


350 THE FELLOWSHIP OF THE RING 


‘Ah, alas!’ cried Gloin. ‘When will the day come of our 
revenge? But still there are the Three. What of the Three 
Rings of the Elves? Very mighty Rings, it is said. Do not the 
Elf-lords keep them? Yet they too were made by the Dark 
Lord long ago. Are they idle? I see Elf-lords here. Will they 
not say?’ 

The Elves returned no answer. ‘Did you not hear me, 
Gloin?’ said Elrond. “The Three were not made by Sauron, 
nor did he ever touch them. But of them it is not permitted 
to speak. So much only in this hour of doubt I may now say. 
They are not idle. But they were not made as weapons of 
war or conquest: that is not their power. Those who made 
them did not desire strength or domination or hoarded 
wealth, but understanding, making, and healing, to preserve 
all things unstained. These things the Elves of Middle-earth 
have in some measure gained, though with sorrow. But all 
that has been wrought by those who wield the Three will turn 
to their undoing, and their minds and hearts will become 
revealed to Sauron, if he regains the One. It would be better 
if the Three had never been. That is his purpose.’ 

‘But what then would happen, if the Ruling Ring were 
destroyed, as you counsel?’ asked Gloin. 

‘We know not for certain,’ answered Elrond sadly. ‘Some 
hope that the Three Rings, which Sauron has never touched, 
would then become free, and their rulers might heal the hurts 
of the world that he has wrought. But maybe when the One 
has gone, the Three will fail, and many fair things will fade 
and be forgotten. That is my belief.’ 

‘Yet all the Elves are willing to endure this chance,’ said 
Glorfindel, ‘if by it the power of Sauron may be broken, and 
the fear of his dominion be taken away for ever.’ 

“Thus we return once more to the destroying of the Ring,’ 
said Erestor, ‘and yet we come no nearer. What strength have 
we for the finding of the Fire in which it was made? That is 
the path of despair. Of folly I would say, if the long wisdom 
of Elrond did not forbid me.’ 

‘Despair, or folly?’ said Gandalf. ‘It is not despair, for 


THE COUNCIL OF ELROND 351 


despair is only for those who see the end beyond all doubt. 
We do not. It is wisdom to recognize necessity, when all other 
courses have been weighed, though as folly it may appear to 
those who cling to false hope. Well, let folly be our cloak, a 
veil before the eyes of the Enemy! For he is very wise, and 
weighs all things to a nicety in the scales of his malice. But 
the only measure that he knows is desire, desire for power; 
and so he judges all hearts. Into his heart the thought will not 
enter that any will refuse it, that having the Ring we may 
seek to destroy it. If we seek this, we shall put him out of 
reckoning.’ 

‘At least for a while,’ said Elrond. “The road must be trod, 
but it will be very hard. And neither strength nor wisdom will 
carry us far upon it. This quest may be attempted by the 
weak with as much hope as the strong. Yet such is oft the 
course of deeds that move the wheels of the world: small 
hands do them because they must, while the eyes of the great 
are elsewhere.’ 


‘Very well, very well, Master Elrond!’ said Bilbo suddenly. 
‘Say no more! It is plain enough what you are pointing at. 
Bilbo the silly hobbit started this affair, and Bilbo had better 
finish it, or himself. I was very comfortable here, and getting 
on with my book. If you want to know, I am just writing an 
ending for it. I had thought of putting: and he lived happily 
ever afterwards to the end of his days. It is a good ending, and 
none the worse for having been used before. Now I shall have 
to alter that: it does not look like coming true; and anyway 
there will evidently have to be several more chapters, if I live 
to write them. It is a frightful nuisance. When ought I to 
start?’ 

Boromir looked in surprise at Bilbo, but the laughter died 
on his lips when he saw that all the others regarded the old 
hobbit with grave respect. Only Gloin smiled, but his smile 
came from old memories. 

‘Of course, my dear Bilbo,’ said Gandalf. ‘If you had really 
started this affair, you might be expected to finish it. But you 


352 THE FELLOWSHIP OF THE RING 


know well enough now that starting is too great a claim for 
any, and that only a small part is played in great deeds by 
any hero. You need not bow! Though the word was meant, 
and we do not doubt that under jest you are making a valiant 
offer. But one beyond your strength, Bilbo. You cannot take 
this thing back. It has passed on. If you need my advice any 
longer, I should say that your part is ended, unless as a 
recorder. Finish your book, and leave the ending unaltered! 
There is still hope for it. But get ready to write a sequel, when 
they come back.’ 

Bilbo laughed. ‘I have never known you give me pleasant 
advice before,’ he said. ‘As all your unpleasant advice has 
been good, I wonder if this advice is not bad. Still, I don’t 
suppose I have the strength or luck left to deal with the Ring. 
It has grown, and I have not. But tell me: what do you mean 
by they?’ 

“The messengers who are sent with the Ring.’ 

‘Exactly! And who are they to be? That seems to me what 
this Council has to decide, and all that it has to decide. 
Elves may thrive on speech alone, and Dwarves endure great 
weariness; but I am only an old hobbit, and I miss my meal 
at noon. Can’t we think of some names now? Or put it off 
till after dinner?’ 


No one answered. The noon-bell rang. Still no one spoke. 
Frodo glanced at all the faces, but they were not turned to 
him. All the Council sat with downcast eyes, as if in deep 
thought. A great dread fell on him, as if he was awaiting the 
pronouncement of some doom that he had long foreseen and 
vainly hoped might after all never be spoken. An overwhelm- 
ing longing to rest and remain at peace by Bilbo’s side in 
Rivendell filled all his heart. At last with an effort he spoke, 
and wondered to hear his own words, as if some other will 
was using his small voice. 

‘T will take the Ring,’ he said, ‘though I do not know the 


> 


way. 


THE COUNCIL OF ELROND 353 


Elrond raised his eyes and looked at him, and Frodo felt 
his heart pierced by the sudden keenness of the glance. ‘If I 
understand aright all that I have heard,’ he said, ‘I think that 
this task is appointed for you, Frodo; and that if you do not 
find a way, no one will. This is the hour of the Shire-folk, 
when they arise from their quiet fields to shake the towers 
and counsels of the Great. Who of all the Wise could have 
foreseen it? Or, if they are wise, why should they expect to 
know it, until the hour has struck? 

‘But it is a heavy burden. So heavy that none could lay it 
on another. I do not lay it on you. But if you take it freely, I 
will say that your choice is right; and though all the mighty 
Elf-friends of old, Hador, and Hurin, and Turin, and Beren 
himself were assembled together, your seat should be among 
them.’ 

‘But you won’t send him off alone surely, Master?’ cried 
Sam, unable to contain himself any longer, and jumping up 
from the corner where he had been quietly sitting on the 
floor. 

‘No indeed!’ said Elrond, turning towards him with a smile. 
“You at least shall go with him. It is hardly possible to separate 
you from him, even when he is summoned to a secret council 
and you are not.’ 

Sam sat down, blushing and muttering. ‘A nice pickle we 
have landed ourselves in, Mr. Frodo!’ he said, shaking his 
head. 


Chapter 3 


THE RING GOES SOUTH 


Later that day the hobbits held a meeting of their own in 
Bilbo’s room. Merry and Pippin were indignant when they 
heard that Sam had crept into the Council, and had been 
chosen as Frodo’s companion. 

‘It’s most unfair,’ said Pippin. ‘Instead of throwing him 
out, and clapping him in chains, Elrond goes and rewards 
him for his cheek!’ 

‘Rewards!’ said Frodo. ‘I can’t imagine a more severe pun- 
ishment. You are not thinking what you are saying: con- 
demned to go on this hopeless journey, a reward? Yesterday 
I dreamed that my task was done, and I could rest here, a 
long while, perhaps for good.’ 

‘I don’t wonder,’ said Merry, ‘and I wish you could. But 
we are envying Sam, not you. If you have to go, then it will 
be a punishment for any of us to be left behind, even in 
Rivendell. We have come a long way with you and been 
through some stiff times. We want to go on.’ 

“That’s what I meant,’ said Pippin. ‘We hobbits ought to 
stick together, and we will. I shall go, unless they chain me 
up. There must be someone with intelligence in the party.’ 

“Then you certainly will not be chosen, Peregrin Took!’ 
said Gandalf, looking in through the window, which was near 
the ground. ‘But you are all worrying yourselves unnecess- 
arily. Nothing is decided yet.’ 

‘Nothing decided!’ cried Pippin. “Then what were you all 
doing? You were shut up for hours.’ 

“Talking,” said Bilbo. “There was a deal of talk, and every- 
one had an eye-opener. Even old Gandalf. I think Legolas’s 
bit of news about Gollum caught even him on the hop, 
though he passed it off.’ 


THE RING GOES SOUTH 355 


“You were wrong,’ said Gandalf. ‘You were inattentive. I 
had already heard of it from Gwaihir. If you want to know, 
the only real eye-openers, as you put it, were you and Frodo; 
and I was the only one that was not surprised.’ 

‘Well, anyway,’ said Bilbo, ‘nothing was decided beyond 
choosing poor Frodo and Sam. I was afraid all the time that 
it might come to that, if I was let off. But if you ask me, 
Elrond will send out a fair number, when the reports come 
in. Have they started yet, Gandalf?’ 

‘Yes,’ said the wizard. ‘Some of the scouts have been sent 
out already. More will go tomorrow. Elrond is sending Elves, 
and they will get in touch with the Rangers, and maybe with 
Thranduil’s folk in Mirkwood. And Aragorn has gone with 
Elrond’s sons. We shall have to scour the lands all round for 
many long leagues before any move is made. So cheer up, 
Frodo! You will probably make quite a long stay here.’ 

‘Ah! said Sam gloomily. “‘We’ll just wait long enough for 
winter to come.’ 

“That can’t be helped,’ said Bilbo. ‘It’s your fault partly, 
Frodo my lad: insisting on waiting for my birthday. A funny 
way of honouring it, I can’t help thinking. Not the day I 
should have chosen for letting the S.-B.s into Bag End. But 
there it is: you can’t wait now till spring; and you can’t go till 
the reports come back. 


When winter first begins to bite 
and stones crack in the frosty night, 
when pools are black and trees are bare, 
*rs evil in the Wild to fare. 


But that I am afraid will be just your luck.’ 

‘I am afraid it will,’ said Gandalf. ‘We can’t start until we 
have found out about the Riders.’ 

‘T thought they were all destroyed in the flood,’ said Merry. 

“You cannot destroy Ringwraiths like that,’ said Gandalf. 
“The power of their master is in them, and they stand or fall 
by him. We hope that they were all unhorsed and unmasked, 


356 THE FELLOWSHIP OF THE RING 


and so made for a while less dangerous; but we must find out 
for certain. In the meantime you should try and forget your 
troubles, Frodo. I do not know if I can do anything to help 
you; but I will whisper this in your ears. Someone said that 
intelligence would be needed in the party. He was right. I 
think I shall come with you.’ 

So great was Frodo’s delight at this announcement that 
Gandalf left the window-sill, where he had been sitting, and 
took off his hat and bowed. ‘I only said J think I shall come. 
Do not count on anything yet. In this matter Elrond will have 
much to say, and your friend the Strider. Which reminds me, 
I want to see Elrond. I must be off.’ 

‘How long do you think I shall have here?’ said Frodo to 
Bilbo when Gandalf had gone. 

‘Oh, I don’t know. I can’t count days in Rivendell,’ said 
Bilbo. ‘But quite long, I should think. We can have many a 
good talk. What about helping me with my book, and making 
a start on the next? Have you thought of an ending?’ 

“Yes, several, and all are dark and unpleasant,’ said Frodo. 

‘Oh, that won’t do!’ said Bilbo. ‘Books ought to have good 
endings. How would this do: and they all settled down and 
lived together happily ever after?’ 

‘It will do well, if it ever comes to that,’ said Frodo. 

‘Ah! said Sam. ‘And where will they live? That’s what I 
often wonder.’ 


For a while the hobbits continued to talk and think of the 
past journey and of the perils that lay ahead; but such was 
the virtue of the land of Rivendell that soon all fear and 
anxiety was lifted from their minds. The future, good or ill, 
was not forgotten, but ceased to have any power over the 
present. Health and hope grew strong in them, and they were 
content with each good day as it came, taking pleasure in 
every meal, and in every word and song. 

So the days slipped away, as each morning dawned bright 
and fair, and each evening followed cool and clear. But 
autumn was waning fast; slowly the golden light faded to pale 


THE RING GOES SOUTH 357 


silver, and the lingering leaves fell from the naked trees. A 
wind began to blow chill from the Misty Mountains to the 
east. The Hunter’s Moon waxed round in the night sky, and 
put to flight all the lesser stars. But low in the South one star 
shone red. Every night, as the Moon waned again, it shone 
brighter and brighter. Frodo could see it from his window, 
deep in the heavens, burning like a watchful eye that glared 
above the trees on the brink of the valley. 


The hobbits had been nearly two months in the house of 
Elrond, and November had gone by with the last shreds of 
autumn, and December was passing, when the scouts began 
to return. Some had gone north beyond the springs of the 
Hoarwell into the Ettenmoors; and others had gone west, and 
with the help of Aragorn and the Rangers had searched the 
lands far down the Greyflood, as far as Tharbad, where the 
old North Road crossed the river by a ruined town. Many 
had gone east and south; and some of these had crossed the 
Mountains and entered Mirkwood, while others had climbed 
the pass at the sources of the Gladden River, and had come 
down into Wilderland and over the Gladden Fields and so at 
length had reached the old home of Radagast at Rhosgobel. 
Radagast was not there; and they had returned over the high 
pass that was called the Redhorn Gate. The sons of Elrond, 
Elladan and Elrohir, were the last to return; they had made a 
great journey, passing down the Silverlode into a strange 
country, but of their errand they would not speak to any save 
to Elrond. 

In no region had the messengers discovered any signs or 
tidings of the Riders or other servants of the Enemy. Even 
from the Eagles of the Misty Mountains they had learned no 
fresh news. Nothing had been seen or heard of Gollum; but 
the wild wolves were still gathering, and were hunting again 
far up the Great River. Three of the black horses had been 
found at once drowned in the flooded Ford. On the rocks of 
the rapids below it searchers discovered the bodies of five 
more, and also a long black cloak, slashed and tattered. Of 


358 THE FELLOWSHIP OF THE RING 


the Black Riders no other trace was to be seen, and nowhere 
was their presence to be felt. It seemed that they had vanished 
from the North. 

‘Eight out of the Nine are accounted for at least,’ said 
Gandalf. ‘It is rash to be too sure, yet I think that we may 
hope now that the Ringwraiths were scattered, and have been 
obliged to return as best they could to their Master in Mordor, 
empty and shapeless. 

‘Tf that is so, it will be some time before they can begin the 
hunt again. Of course the Enemy has other servants, but they 
will have to journey all the way to the borders of Rivendell 
before they can pick up our trail. And if we are careful that 
will be hard to find. But we must delay no longer.’ 


Elrond summoned the hobbits to him. He looked gravely 
at Frodo. “The time has come,’ he said. ‘If the Ring is to set 
out, it must go soon. But those who go with it must not count 
on their errand being aided by war or force. They must pass 
into the domain of the Enemy far from aid. Do you still hold 
to your word, Frodo, that you will be the Ring-bearer?’ 

‘T do,’ said Frodo. ‘I will go with Sam.’ 

“Then I cannot help you much, not even with counsel,’ 
said Elrond. ‘I can foresee very little of your road; and how 
your task is to be achieved I do not know. The Shadow has 
crept now to the feet of the Mountains, and draws nigh even 
to the borders of the Greyflood; and under the Shadow all is 
dark to me. You will meet many foes, some open, and some 
disguised; and you may find friends upon your way when 
you least look for it. I will send out messages, such as I can 
contrive, to those whom I know in the wide world; but so 
perilous are the lands now become that some may well mis- 
carry, or come no quicker than you yourself. 

‘And I will choose you companions to go with you, as far 
as they will or fortune allows. The number must be few, since 
your hope is in speed and secrecy. Had I a host of Elves in 
armour of the Elder Days, it would avail little, save to arouse 
the power of Mordor. 


THE RING GOES SOUTH 359 


“The Company of the Ring shall be Nine; and the Nine 
Walkers shall be set against the Nine Riders that are evil. 
With you and your faithful servant, Gandalf will go; for this 
shall be his great task, and maybe the end of his labours. 

‘For the rest, they shall represent the other Free Peoples of 
the World: Elves, Dwarves, and Men. Legolas shall be for 
the Elves; and Gimli son of Gloin for the Dwarves. They are 
willing to go at least to the passes of the Mountains, and 
maybe beyond. For men you shall have Aragorn son of 
Arathorn, for the Ring of Isildur concerns him closely.’ 

‘Strider!’ cried Frodo. 

‘Yes,’ he said with a smile. ‘I ask leave once again to be 
your companion, Frodo.’ 

‘I would have begged you to come,’ said Frodo, ‘only I 
thought you were going to Minas ‘Tirith with Boromir.’ 

‘I am,’ said Aragorn. ‘And the Sword-that-was-Broken 
shall be re-forged ere I set out to war. But your road and our 
road lie together for many hundreds of miles. There- 
fore Boromir will also be in the Company. He is a valiant 
man.’ 

“There remain two more to be found,’ said Elrond. “These 
I will consider. Of my household I may find some that it 
seems good to me to send.’ 

‘But that will leave no place for us!’ cried Pippin in dismay. 
‘We don’t want to be left behind. We want to go with Frodo.’ 

“That is because you do not understand and cannot 
imagine what lies ahead,’ said Elrond. 

‘Neither does Frodo,’ said Gandalf, unexpectedly support- 
ing Pippin. ‘Nor do any of us see clearly. It is true that if 
these hobbits understood the danger, they would not dare to 
go. But they would still wish to go, or wish that they dared, 
and be shamed and unhappy. I think, Elrond, that in this 
matter it would be well to trust rather to their friendship than 
to great wisdom. Even if you chose for us an Elf-lord, such 
as Glorfindel, he could not storm the Dark Tower, nor open 
the road to the Fire by the power that is in him.’ 

“You speak gravely,’ said Elrond, ‘but I am in doubt. The 


360 THE FELLOWSHIP OF THE RING 


Shire, I forebode, is not free now from peril; and these two 
I had thought to send back there as messengers, to do what 
they could, according to the fashion of their country, to warn 
the people of their danger. In any case, I judge that the 
younger of these two, Peregrin Took, should remain. My 
heart is against his going.’ 

“Then, Master Elrond, you will have to lock me in prison, 
or send me home tied in a sack,’ said Pippin. ‘For otherwise 
I shall follow the Company.’ 

‘Let it be so then. You shall go,’ said Elrond, and he sighed. 
‘Now the tale of Nine is filled. In seven days the Company 
must depart.’ 


The Sword of Elendil was forged anew by Elvish smiths, 
and on its blade was traced a device of seven stars set between 
the crescent Moon and the rayed Sun, and about them was 
written many runes; for Aragorn son of Arathorn was going 
to war upon the marches of Mordor. Very bright was that 
sword when it was made whole again; the light of the sun 
shone redly in it, and the light of the moon shone cold, and 
its edge was hard and keen. And Aragorn gave it a new name 
and called it Anduril, Flame of the West. 

Aragorn and Gandalf walked together or sat speaking of 
their road and the perils they would meet; and they pondered 
the storied and figured maps and books of lore that were in 
the house of Elrond. Sometimes Frodo was with them; but 
he was content to lean on their guidance, and he spent as 
much time as he could with Bilbo. 

In those last days the hobbits sat together in the evening in 
the Hall of Fire, and there among many tales they heard told 
in full the lay of Beren and Luthien and the winning of the 
Great Jewel; but in the day, while Merry and Pippin were 
out and about, Frodo and Sam were to be found with Bilbo 
in his own small room. Then Bilbo would read passages from 
his book (which still seemed very incomplete), or scraps of 
his verses, or would take notes of Frodo’s adventures. 

On the morning of the last day Frodo was alone with Bilbo, 


THE RING GOES SOUTH 361 


and the old hobbit pulled out from under his bed a wooden 
box. He lifted the lid and fumbled inside. 

‘Here is your sword,’ he said. “But it was broken, you know. 
I took it to keep it safe but P’ve forgotten to ask if the smiths 
could mend it. No time now. So I thought, perhaps, you 
would care to have this, don’t you know?’ 

He took from the box a small sword in an old shabby 
leathern scabbard. Then he drew it, and its polished and 
well-tended blade glittered suddenly, cold and bright. “This 
is Sting,’ he said, and thrust it with little effort deep into 
a wooden beam. “Take it, if you like. I shan’t want it again, 
I expect.’ 

Frodo accepted it gratefully. 

‘Also there is this!’ said Bilbo, bringing out a parcel which 
seemed to be rather heavy for its size. He unwound several 
folds of old cloth, and held up a small shirt of mail. It was 
close-woven of many rings, as supple almost as linen, cold as 
ice, and harder than steel. It shone like moonlit silver, and 
was studded with white gems. With it was a belt of pearl and 
crystal. 

‘It’s a pretty thing, isn’t it?’ said Bilbo, moving it in the 
light. ‘And useful. It is my dwarf-mail that Thorin gave me. 
I got it back from Michel Delving before I started, and packed 
it with my luggage. I brought all the mementoes of my Jour- 
ney away with me, except the Ring. But I did not expect to 
use this, and I don’t need it now, except to look at sometimes. 
You hardly feel any weight when you put it on.’ 

‘T should look — well, I don’t think I should look right in it,’ 
said Frodo. 

‘Just what I said myself,’ said Bilbo. ‘But never mind about 
looks. You can wear it under your outer clothes. Come on! 
You must share this secret with me. Don’t tell anybody else! 
But I should feel happier if I knew you were wearing it. I 
have a fancy it would turn even the knives of the Black 
Riders,’ he ended in a low voice. 

‘Very well, I will take it,’ said Frodo. Bilbo put it on him, 
and fastened Sting upon the glittering belt; and then Frodo 


362 THE FELLOWSHIP OF THE RING 


put over the top his old weather-stained breeches, tunic, and 
jacket. 

‘Just a plain hobbit you look,’ said Bilbo. ‘But there is more 
about you now than appears on the surface. Good luck to 
you!’ He turned away and looked out of the window, trying 
to hum a tune. 

‘I cannot thank you as I should, Bilbo, for this, and for all 
your past kindnesses,’ said Frodo. 

‘Don’t try!’ said the old hobbit, turning round and slapping 
him on the back. ‘Ow!’ he cried. ‘You are too hard now to 
slap! But there you are: Hobbits must stick together, and 
especially Bagginses. All I ask in return is: take as much care 
of yourself as you can, and bring back all the news you can, 
and any old songs and tales you can come by. I'll do my best 
to finish my book before you return. I should like to write the 
second book, if I am spared.’ He broke off and turned to the 
window again, singing softly. 


I sit beside the fire and think 
of all that I have seen, 

of meadow-flowers and butterflies 
in summers that have been; 


Of yellow leaves and gossamer 
in autumns that there were, 
with morning mist and silver sun 

and wind upon my hair. 


I sit beside the fire and think 
of how the world will be 

when winter comes without a spring 
that I shall ever see. 


For still there are so many things 
that I have never seen: 

in every wood in every spring 
there 1s a different green. 


THE RING GOES SOUTH 363 


I sit beside the fire and think 
of people long ago, 

and people who will see a world 
that I shall never know. 


But all the while I sit and think 
of times there were before, 

I listen for returning feet 
and voices at the door. 


It was a cold grey day near the end of December. The East 
Wind was streaming through the bare branches of the trees, 
and seething in the dark pines on the hills. Ragged clouds 
were hurrying overhead, dark and low. As the cheerless 
shadows of the early evening began to fall the Company 
made ready to set out. They were to start at dusk, for Elrond 
counselled them to journey under cover of night as often as 
they could, until they were far from Rivendell. 

“You should fear the many eyes of the servants of Sauron,’ 
he said. ‘I do not doubt that news of the discomfiture of the 
Riders has already reached him, and he will be filled with 
wrath. Soon now his spies on foot and wing will be abroad 
in the northern lands. Even of the sky above you must beware 
as you go on your way.’ 


The Company took little gear of war, for their hope was 
in secrecy not in battle. Aragorn had Anduril but no other 
weapon, and he went forth clad only in rusty green and 
brown, as a Ranger of the wilderness. Boromir had a long 
sword, in fashion like Anduril but of less lineage, and he bore 
also a shield and his war-horn. 

‘Loud and clear it sounds in the valleys of the hills,’ he 
said, ‘and then let all the foes of Gondor flee!’ Putting it to 
his lips he blew a blast, and the echoes leapt from rock to 
rock, and all that heard that voice in Rivendell sprang to their 
feet. 

‘Slow should you be to wind that horn again, Boromir,’ 


364 THE FELLOWSHIP OF THE RING 


said Elrond, ‘until you stand once more on the borders of 
your land, and dire need is on you.’ 

‘Maybe,’ said Boromir. ‘But always I have let my horn cry 
at setting forth, and though thereafter we may walk in the 
shadows, I will not go forth as a thief in the night.’ 

Gimli the dwarf alone wore openly a short shirt of steel- 
rings, for dwarves make light of burdens; and in his belt was 
a broad-bladed axe. Legolas had a bow and a quiver, and at 
his belt a long white knife. The younger hobbits wore the 
swords that they had taken from the barrow; but Frodo took 
only Sting; and his mail-coat, as Bilbo wished, remained 
hidden. Gandalf bore his staff, but girt at his side was the 
elven-sword Glamdring, the mate of Orcrist that lay now 
upon the breast of Thorin under the Lonely Mountain. 

All were well furnished by Elrond with thick warm clothes, 
and they had jackets and cloaks lined with fur. Spare food 
and clothes and blankets and other needs were laden on a 
pony, none other than the poor beast that they had brought 
from Bree. 

The stay in Rivendell had worked a great wonder of change 
on him: he was glossy and seemed to have the vigour of youth. 
It was Sam who had insisted on choosing him, declaring that 
Bill (as he called him) would pine, if he did not come. 

“That animal can nearly talk,’ he said, ‘and would talk, if 
he stayed here much longer. He gave me a look as plain as 
Mr. Pippin could speak it: if you don’t let me go with you, 
Sam, [ll follow on my own.’ So Bill was going as the beast 
of burden, yet he was the only member of the Company that 
did not seem depressed. 


Their farewells had been said in the great hall by the fire, 
and they were only waiting now for Gandalf, who had not 
yet come out of the house. A gleam of firelight came from 
the open doors, and soft lights were glowing in many 
windows. Bilbo huddled in a cloak stood silent on the door- 
step beside Frodo. Aragorn sat with his head bowed to his 
knees; only Elrond knew fully what this hour meant to him. 


THE RING GOES SOUTH 365 


The others could be seen as grey shapes in the darkness. 

Sam was standing by the pony, sucking his teeth, and 
staring moodily into the gloom where the river roared stonily 
below; his desire for adventure was at its lowest ebb. 

‘Bill, my lad,’ he said, ‘you oughtn’t to have took up with 
us. You could have stayed here and et the best hay till the 
new grass comes.’ Bill swished his tail and said nothing. 

Sam eased the pack on his shoulders, and went over 
anxiously in his mind all the things that he had stowed 
in it, wondering if he had forgotten anything: his chief 
treasure, his cooking gear; and the little box of salt that 
he always carried and refilled when he could; a good supply 
of pipe-weed (but not near enough, [ll warrant); flint 
and tinder; woollen hose; linen; various small belongings of 
his master’s that Frodo had forgotten and Sam had stowed 
to bring them out in triumph when they were called for. He 
went through them all. 

‘Rope!’ he muttered. ‘No rope! And only last night you 
said to yourself: ““Sam, what about a bit of rope? You’ll want 
it, if you haven’t got it.” Well, Pll want it. I can’t get it now.’ 


At that moment Elrond came out with Gandalf, and he 
called the Company to him. “This is my last word,’ he said 
in a low voice. “The Ring-bearer is setting out on the Quest 
of Mount Doom. On him alone is any charge laid: neither to 
cast away the Ring, nor to deliver it to any servant of the 
Enemy nor indeed to let any handle it, save members of the 
Company and the Council, and only then in gravest need. 
The others go with him as free companions, to help him on 
his way. You may tarry, or come back, or turn aside into 
other paths, as chance allows. The further you go, the less 
easy will it be to withdraw; yet no oath or bond is laid on you 
to go further than you will. For you do not yet know the 
strength of your hearts, and you cannot foresee what each 
may meet upon the road.’ 

‘Faithless is he that says farewell when the road darkens,’ 
said Gimli. 


366 THE FELLOWSHIP OF THE RING 


‘Maybe,’ said Elrond, ‘but let him not vow to walk in the 
dark, who has not seen the nightfall.’ 

‘Yet sworn word may strengthen quaking heart,’ said 
Gimli. 

“Or break it,’ said Elrond. ‘Look not too far ahead! But go 
now with good hearts! Farewell, and may the blessing of Elves 
and Men and all Free Folk go with you. May the stars shine 
upon your faces!’ 

‘Good ... good luck!’ cried Bilbo, stuttering with the cold. 
‘I don’t suppose you will be able to keep a diary, Frodo my 
lad, but I shall expect a full account when you get back. And 
don’t be too long! Farewell!’ 


Many others of Elrond’s household stood in the shadows 
and watched them go, bidding them farewell with soft voices. 
There was no laughter, and no song or music. At last they 
turned away and faded silently into the dusk. 

They crossed the bridge and wound slowly up the long 
steep paths that led out of the cloven vale of Rivendell; and 
they came at length to the high moor where the wind hissed 
through the heather. Then with one glance at the Last 
Homely House twinkling below them they strode away far 
into the night. 


At the Ford of Bruinen they left the Road and turning 
southwards went on by narrow paths among the folded lands. 
Their purpose was to hold this course west of the Mountains 
for many miles and days. The country was much rougher 
and more barren than in the green vale of the Great River in 
Wilderland on the other side of the range, and their going 
would be slow; but they hoped in this way to escape the 
notice of unfriendly eyes. The spies of Sauron had hitherto 
seldom been seen in this empty country, and the paths were 
little known except to the people of Rivendell. 

Gandalf walked in front, and with him went Aragorn, who 
knew this land even in the dark. The others were in file 
behind, and Legolas whose eyes were keen was the rearguard. 


THE RING GOES SOUTH 367 


The first part of their journey was hard and dreary, and Frodo 
remembered little of it, save the wind. For many sunless 
days an icy blast came from the Mountains in the east, and 
no garment seemed able to keep out its searching fingers. 
Though the Company was well clad, they seldom felt warm, 
either moving or at rest. They slept uneasily during the 
middle of the day, in some hollow of the land, or hidden 
under the tangled thorn-bushes that grew in thickets in many 
places. In the late afternoon they were roused by the watch, 
and took their chief meal: cold and cheerless as a rule, for 
they could seldom risk the lighting of a fire. In the evening 
they went on again, always as nearly southward as they could 
find a way. 

At first it seemed to the hobbits that although they walked 
and stumbled until they were weary, they were creeping for- 
ward like snails, and getting nowhere. Each day the land 
looked much the same as it had the day before. Yet steadily 
the mountains were drawing nearer. South of Rivendell they 
rose ever higher, and bent westwards; and about the feet of 
the main range there was tumbled an ever wider land of bleak 
hills, and deep valleys filled with turbulent waters. Paths were 
few and winding, and led them often only to the edge of 
some sheer fall, or down into treacherous swamps. 


They had been a fortnight on the way when the weather 
changed. The wind suddenly fell and then veered round to 
the south. The swift-flowing clouds lifted and melted away, 
and the sun came out, pale and bright. There came a cold 
clear dawn at the end of a long stumbling night-march. The 
travellers reached a low ridge crowned with ancient holly- 
trees whose grey-green trunks seemed to have been built out 
of the very stone of the hills. Their dark leaves shone and 
their berries glowed red in the light of the rising sun. 

Away in the south Frodo could see the dim shapes of lofty 
mountains that seemed now to stand across the path that the 
Company was taking. At the left of this high range rose three 
peaks; the tallest and nearest stood up like a tooth tipped with 


368 THE FELLOWSHIP OF THE RING 


snow; its great, bare, northern precipice was still largely in 
the shadow, but where the sunlight slanted upon it, it glowed 
red. 

Gandalf stood at Frodo’s side and looked out under his 
hand. ‘We have done well,’ he said. ‘We have reached the 
borders of the country that Men call Hollin; many Elves lived 
here in happier days, when Eregion was its name. Five-and- 
forty leagues as the crow flies we have come, though many 
long miles further our feet have walked. The land and the 
weather will be milder now, but perhaps all the more 
dangerous.’ 

‘Dangerous or not, a real sunrise is mighty welcome,’ said 
Frodo, throwing back his hood and letting the morning light 
fall on his face. 

‘But the mountains are ahead of us,’ said Pippin. “We must 
have turned eastwards in the night.’ 

‘No,’ said Gandalf. ‘But you see further ahead in the clear 
light. Beyond those peaks the range bends round south-west. 
There are many maps in Elrond’s house, but I suppose you 
never thought to look at them?’ 

“Yes I did, sometimes,’ said Pippin, ‘but I don’t remember 
them. Frodo has a better head for that sort of thing.’ 

‘I need no map,’ said Gimli, who had come up with 
Legolas, and was gazing out before him with a strange light 
in his deep eyes. “There is the land where our fathers worked 
of old, and we have wrought the image of those mountains 
into many works of metal and of stone, and into many 
songs and tales. They stand tall in our dreams: Baraz, Zirak, 
Shathir. 

‘Only once before have I seen them from afar in waking 
life, but I know them and their names, for under them lies 
Khazad-dtim, the Dwarrowdelf, that is now called the Black 
Pit, Moria in the Elvish tongue. Yonder stands Barazinbar, 
the Redhorn, cruel Caradhras; and beyond him are Silvertine 
and Cloudyhead: Celebdil the White, and Fanuidhol the 
Grey, that we call Zirakzigil and Bundushathtr. 

“There the Misty Mountains divide, and between their 


THE RING GOES SOUTH 369 


arms lies the deep-shadowed valley which we cannot for- 
get: Azanulbizar, the Dimrill Dale, which the Elves call 
Nanduhirion.’ 

‘It is for the Dimrill Dale that we are making,’ said Gandalf. 
‘If we climb the pass that is called the Redhorn Gate, under 
the far side of Caradhras, we shall come down by the Dimrill 
Stair into the deep vale of the Dwarves. There lies the 
Mirrormere, and there the River Silverlode rises in its icy 
springs.’ 

‘Dark is the water of Kheled-zaram,’ said Gimli, ‘and cold 
are the springs of Kibil-nala. My heart trembles at the thought 
that I may see them soon.’ 

‘May you have joy of the sight, my good dwarf!’ said 
Gandalf. ‘But whatever you may do, we at least cannot stay 
in that valley. We must go down the Silverlode into the secret 
woods, and so to the Great River, and then 

He paused. 

“Yes, and where then?’ asked Merry. 

“To the end of the journey — in the end,’ said Gandalf. “We 
cannot look too far ahead. Let us be glad that the first stage 
is safely over. I think we will rest here, not only today but 
tonight as well. There is a wholesome air about Hollin. Much 
evil must befall a country before it wholly forgets the Elves, 
if once they dwelt there.’ 

“That is true,’ said Legolas. ‘But the Elves of this land were 
of a race strange to us of the silvan folk, and the trees and 
the grass do not now remember them. Only I hear the stones 
lament them: deep they delved us, fair they wrought us, high 
they builded us; but they are gone. They are gone. They sought 
the Havens long ago.’ 


That morning they lit a fire in a deep hollow shrouded by 
great bushes of holly, and their supper-breakfast was merrier 
than it had been since they set out. They did not hurry to 
bed afterwards, for they expected to have all the night to 
sleep in, and they did not mean to go on again until the 
evening of the next day. Only Aragorn was silent and restless. 


370 THE FELLOWSHIP OF THE RING 


After a while he left the Company and wandered on to the 
ridge; there he stood in the shadow of a tree, looking out 
southwards and westwards, with his head posed as if he was 
listening. Then he returned to the brink of the dell and looked 
down at the others laughing and talking. 

‘What is the matter, Strider?’ Merry called up. ‘What are 
you looking for? Do you miss the East Wind?’ 

‘No indeed,’ he answered. ‘But I miss something. I have 
been in the country of Hollin in many seasons. No folk dwell 
here now, but many other creatures live here at all times, 
especially birds. Yet now all things but you are silent. I can 
feel it. There is no sound for miles about us, and your voices 
seem to make the ground echo. I do not understand it.’ 

Gandalf looked up with sudden interest. ‘But what do you 
guess is the reason?’ he asked. ‘Is there more in it than sur- 
prise at seeing four hobbits, not to mention the rest of us, 
where people are so seldom seen or heard?’ 

‘T hope that is it,’ answered Aragorn. ‘But I have a sense of 
watchfulness, and of fear, that I have never had here before.’ 

“Then we must be more careful,’ said Gandalf. ‘If you 
bring a Ranger with you, it is well to pay attention to him, 
especially if the Ranger is Aragorn. We must stop talking 
aloud, rest quietly, and set the watch.’ 


It was Sam’s turn that day to take the first watch, but 
Aragorn joined him. The others fell asleep. Then the silence 
grew until even Sam felt it. The breathing of the sleepers 
could be plainly heard. The swish of the pony’s tail and the 
occasional movements of his feet became loud noises. Sam 
could hear his own joints creaking, if he stirred. Dead silence 
was around him, and over all hung a clear blue sky, as the 
Sun rode up from the East. Away in the South a dark patch 
appeared, and grew, and drove north like flying smoke in the 
wind. 

‘What’s that, Strider? It don’t look like a cloud,’ said Sam 
in a whisper to Aragorn. He made no answer, he was gazing 
intently at the sky; but before long Sam could see for himself 


THE RING GOES SOUTH 371 


what was approaching. Flocks of birds, flying at great speed, 
were wheeling and circling, and traversing all the land as if 
they were searching for something; and they were steadily 
drawing nearer. 

‘Lie flat and still!’ hissed Aragorn, pulling Sam down into 
the shade of a holly-bush; for a whole regiment of birds had 
broken away suddenly from the main host, and came, flying 
low, straight towards the ridge. Sam thought they were a kind 
of crow of large size. As they passed overhead, in so dense a 
throng that their shadow followed them darkly over the 
ground below, one harsh croak was heard. 

Not until they had dwindled into the distance, north and 
west, and the sky was again clear would Aragorn rise. Then 
he sprang up and went and wakened Gandalf. 

‘Regiments of black crows are flying over all the land 
between the Mountains and the Greyflood,’ he said, ‘and 
they have passed over Hollin. They are not natives here; they 
are crebain out of Fangorn and Dunland. I do not know what 
they are about: possibly there is some trouble away south 
from which they are fleeing; but I think they are spying out 
the land. I have also glimpsed many hawks flying high up in 
the sky. I think we ought to move again this evening. Hollin 
is no longer wholesome for us: it is being watched.’ 

‘And in that case so is the Redhorn Gate,’ said Gandalf; 
‘and how we can get over that without being seen, I cannot 
imagine. But we will think of that when we must. As for 
moving as soon as it is dark, I am afraid that you are right.’ 

‘Luckily our fire made little smoke, and had burned low 
before the crebain came,’ said Aragorn. ‘It must be put out 
and not lit again.’ 


‘Well if that isn’t a plague and a nuisance!’ said Pippin. 
The news: no fire, and a move again by night, had been 
broken to him, as soon as he woke in the late afternoon. ‘All 
because of a pack of crows! I had looked forward to a real 
good meal tonight: something hot.’ 

‘Well, you can go on looking forward,’ said Gandalf. 


372 THE FELLOWSHIP OF THE RING 


“There may be many unexpected feasts ahead for you. For 
myself I should like a pipe to smoke in comfort, and warmer 
feet. However, we are certain of one thing at any rate: it will 
get warmer as we get south.’ 

“Too warm, I shouldn’t wonder,’ muttered Sam to Frodo. 
‘But I’m beginning to think it’s time we got a sight of that 
Fiery Mountain, and saw the end of the Road, so to speak. I 
thought at first that this here Redhorn, or whatever its name 
is, might be it, till Gimli spoke his piece. A fair jaw-cracker 
dwarf-language must be!’ Maps conveyed nothing to Sam’s 
mind, and all distances in these strange lands seemed so vast 
that he was quite out of his reckoning. 

All that day the Company remained in hiding. The dark 
birds passed over now and again; but as the westering Sun 
grew red they disappeared southwards. At dusk the Company 
set out, and turning now half east they steered their course 
towards Caradhras, which far away still glowed faintly red in 
the last light of the vanished Sun. One by one white stars 
sprang forth as the sky faded. 

Guided by Aragorn they struck a good path. It looked to 
Frodo like the remains of an ancient road, that had once been 
broad and well planned, from Hollin to the mountain-pass. 
The Moon, now at the full, rose over the mountains, and cast 
a pale light in which the shadows of stones were black. Many 
of them looked to have been worked by hands, though now 
they lay tumbled and ruinous in a bleak, barren land. 

It was the cold chill hour before the first stir of dawn, and 
the moon was low. Frodo looked up at the sky. Suddenly 
he saw or felt a shadow pass over the high stars, as if for a 
moment they faded and then flashed out again. He shivered. 

‘Did you see anything pass over?’ he whispered to Gandalf, 
who was just ahead. 

‘No, but I felt it, whatever it was,’ he answered. ‘It may be 
nothing, only a wisp of thin cloud.’ 

‘It was moving fast then,’ muttered Aragorn, ‘and not with 
the wind.’ 


THE RING GOES SOUTH 373 


Nothing further happened that night. The next morning 
dawned even brighter than before. But the air was chill again; 
already the wind was turning back towards the east. For two 
more nights they marched on, climbing steadily but ever 
more slowly as their road wound up into the hills, and the 
mountains towered up, nearer and nearer. On the third morn- 
ing Caradhras rose before them, a mighty peak, tipped with 
snow like silver, but with sheer naked sides, dull red as if 
stained with blood. 

There was a black look in the sky, and the sun was wan. 
The wind had gone now round to the north-east. Gandalf 
snuffed the air and looked back. 

‘Winter deepens behind us,’ he said quietly to Aragorn. 
“The heights away north are whiter than they were; snow is 
lying far down their shoulders. Tonight we shall be on our 
way high up towards the Redhorn Gate. We may well be 
seen by watchers on that narrow path, and waylaid by some 
evil; but the weather may prove a more deadly enemy than 
any. What do you think of your course now, Aragorn?’ 

Frodo overheard these words, and understood that 
Gandalf and Aragorn were continuing some debate that had 
begun long before. He listened anxiously. 

‘T think no good of our course from beginning to end, 
as you know well, Gandalf,’ answered Aragorn. ‘And perils 
known and unknown will grow as we go on. But we must go 
on; and it is no good our delaying the passage of the moun- 
tains. Further south there are no passes, till one comes to the 
Gap of Rohan. I do not trust that way since your news of 
Saruman. Who knows which side now the marshals of the 
Horse-lords serve?’ 

‘Who knows indeed!’ said Gandalf. ‘But there is another 
way, and not by the pass of Caradhras: the dark and secret 
way that we have spoken of.’ 

‘But let us not speak of it again! Not yet. Say nothing to 
the others, I beg, not until it is plain that there is no other 
way.’ 

‘We must decide before we go further,’ answered Gandalf. 


374 THE FELLOWSHIP OF THE RING 


“Then let us weigh the matter in our minds, while the 
others rest and sleep,’ said Aragorn. 


In the late afternoon, while the others were finishing their 
breakfast, Gandalf and Aragorn went aside together and 
stood looking at Caradhras. Its sides were now dark and 
sullen, and its head was in grey cloud. Frodo watched them, 
wondering which way the debate would go. When they 
returned to the Company Gandalf spoke, and then he knew 
that it had been decided to face the weather and the high 
pass. He was relieved. He could not guess what was the other 
dark and secret way, but the very mention of it had seemed 
to fill Aragorn with dismay, and Frodo was glad that it had 
been abandoned. 

‘From signs that we have seen lately,’ said Gandalf, ‘I fear 
that the Redhorn Gate may be watched; and also I have 
doubts of the weather that is coming up behind. Snow may 
come. We must go with all the speed that we can. Even so it 
will take us more than two marches before we reach the top 
of the pass. Dark will come early this evening. We must leave 
as soon as you can get ready.’ 

‘I will add a word of advice, if I may,’ said Boromir. ‘I was 
born under the shadow of the White Mountains and know 
something of journeys in the high places. We shall meet bitter 
cold, if no worse, before we come down on the other side. It 
will not help us to keep so secret that we are frozen to death. 
When we leave here, where there are still a few trees and 
bushes, each of us should carry a faggot of wood, as large as 
he can bear.’ 

‘And Bill could take a bit more, couldn’t you, lad?’ said 
Sam. The pony looked at him mournfully. 

‘Very well,’ said Gandalf. ‘But we must not use the wood 
— not unless it is a choice between fire and death.’ 


The Company set out again, with good speed at first; but 
soon their way became steep and difficult. The twisting 
and climbing road had in many places almost disappeared, 


THE RING GOES SOUTH 375 


and was blocked with many fallen stones. The night grew 
deadly dark under great clouds. A bitter wind swirled among 
the rocks. By midnight they had climbed to the knees of the 
great mountains. The narrow path now wound under a sheer 
wall of cliffs to the left, above which the grim flanks of 
Caradhras towered up invisible in the gloom; on the right 
was a gulf of darkness where the land fell suddenly into a 
deep ravine. 

Laboriously they climbed a sharp slope and halted for a 
moment at the top. Frodo felt a soft touch on his face. He 
put out his arm and saw the dim white flakes of snow settling 
on his sleeve. 

They went on. But before long the snow was falling fast, 
filling all the air, and swirling into Frodo’s eyes. The dark 
bent shapes of Gandalf and Aragorn only a pace or two ahead 
could hardly be seen. 

‘T don’t like this at all,’ panted Sam just behind. ‘Snow’s 
all right on a fine morning, but I like to be in bed while it’s 
falling. I wish this lot would go off to Hobbiton! Folk might 
welcome it there.’ Except on the high moors of the North- 
farthing a heavy fall was rare in the Shire, and was regarded 
as a pleasant event and a chance for fun. No living hobbit 
(save Bilbo) could remember the Fell Winter of 1311, when 
white wolves invaded the Shire over the frozen Brandywine. 

Gandalf halted. Snow was thick on his hood and shoulders; 
it was already ankle-deep about his boots. 

“This is what I feared,’ he said. ‘What do you say now, 
Aragorn?’ 

“That I feared it too,’ Aragorn answered, ‘but less than 
other things. I knew the risk of snow, though it seldom falls 
heavily so far south, save high up in the mountains. But we 
are not high yet; we are still far down, where the paths are 
usually open all the winter.’ 

‘I wonder if this is a contrivance of the Enemy,’ said 
Boromir. “They say in my land that he can govern the storms 
in the Mountains of Shadow that stand upon the borders of 
Mordor. He has strange powers and many allies.’ 


376 THE FELLOWSHIP OF THE RING 


‘His arm has grown long indeed,’ said Gimli, ‘if he can 
draw snow down from the North to trouble us here three 
hundred leagues away.’ 

‘His arm has grown long,’ said Gandalf. 


While they were halted, the wind died down, and the 
snow slackened until it almost ceased. They tramped on 
again. But they had not gone more than a furlong when 
the storm returned with fresh fury. The wind whistled and 
the snow became a blinding blizzard. Soon even Boromir 
found it hard to keep going. The hobbits, bent nearly double, 
toiled along behind the taller folk, but it was plain that they 
could not go much further, if the snow continued. Frodo’s 
feet felt like lead. Pippin was dragging behind. Even Gimli, 
as stout as any dwarf could be, was grumbling as he 
trudged. 

The Company halted suddenly, as if they had come to an 
agreement without any words being spoken. They heard eerie 
noises in the darkness round them. It may have been only a 
trick of the wind in the cracks and gullies of the rocky wall, 
but the sounds were those of shrill cries, and wild howls of 
laughter. Stones began to fall from the mountain-side, whist- 
ling over their heads, or crashing on the path beside them. 
Every now and again they heard a dull rumble, as a great 
boulder rolled down from hidden heights above. 

‘We cannot go further tonight,’ said Boromir. ‘Let those 
call it the wind who will; there are fell voices on the air; and 
these stones are aimed at us.’ 

‘I do call it the wind,’ said Aragorn. ‘But that does not 
make what you say untrue. There are many evil and 
unfriendly things in the world that have little love for those 
that go on two legs, and yet are not in league with Sauron, 
but have purposes of their own. Some have been in this world 
longer than he.’ 

‘Caradhras was called the Cruel, and had an ill name,’ said 
Gimli, ‘long years ago, when rumour of Sauron had not been 
heard in these lands.’ 


THE RING GOES SOUTH 377 


‘It matters little who is the enemy, if we cannot beat off his 
attack,’ said Gandalf. 

‘But what can we do?’ cried Pippin miserably. He was 
leaning on Merry and Frodo, and he was shivering. 

‘Either stop where we are, or go back,’ said Gandalf. ‘It is 
no good going on. Only a little higher, if I remember rightly, 
this path leaves the cliff and runs into a wide shallow trough 
at the bottom of a long hard slope. We should have no shelter 
there from snow, or stones — or anything else.’ 

‘And it is no good going back while the storm holds,’ said 
Aragorn. ‘We have passed no place on the way up that offered 
more shelter than this cliff-wall we are under now.’ 

‘Shelter!’ muttered Sam. ‘If this is shelter, then one wall 
and no roof make a house.’ 


The Company now gathered together as close to the cliff 
as they could. It faced southwards, and near the bottom it 
leaned out a little, so that they hoped it would give them 
some protection from the northerly wind and from the falling 
stones. But eddying blasts swirled round them from every 
side, and the snow flowed down in ever denser clouds. 

They huddled together with their backs to the wall. Bill the 
pony stood patiently but dejectedly in front of the hobbits, 
and screened them a little; but before long the drifting snow 
was above his hocks, and it went on mounting. If they had 
had no larger companions the hobbits would soon have been 
entirely buried. 

A great sleepiness came over Frodo; he felt himself sinking 
fast into a warm and hazy dream. He thought a fire was 
heating his toes, and out of the shadows on the other side of 
the hearth he heard Bilbo’s voice speaking. J don’t think much 
of your diary, he said. Snowstorms on Fanuary the twelfth: there 
was no need to come back to report that! 

But I wanted rest and sleep, Bilbo, Frodo answered with an 
effort, when he felt himself shaken, and he came back pain- 
fully to wakefulness. Boromir had lifted him off the ground 
out of a nest of snow. 


378 THE FELLOWSHIP OF THE RING 


“This will be the death of the halflings, Gandalf,’ said 
Boromir. ‘It is useless to sit here until the snow goes over our 
heads. We must do something to save ourselves.’ 

‘Give them this,’ said Gandalf, searching in his pack and 
drawing out a leathern flask. ‘Just a mouthful each — for all 
of us. It is very precious. It is mzruvor, the cordial of Imladris. 
Elrond gave it to me at our parting. Pass it round!’ 

As soon as Frodo had swallowed a little of the warm and 
fragrant liquor he felt a new strength of heart, and the 
heavy drowsiness left his limbs. The others also revived and 
found fresh hope and vigour. But the snow did not relent. It 
whirled about them thicker than ever, and the wind blew 
louder. 

‘What do you say to fire?’ asked Boromir suddenly. “The 
choice seems near now between fire and death, Gandalf. 
Doubtless we shall be hidden from all unfriendly eyes when 
the snow has covered us, but that will not help us.’ 

“You may make a fire, if you can,’ answered Gandalf. ‘If 
there are any watchers that can endure this storm, then they 
can see us, fire or no.’ 

But though they had brought wood and kindlings by the 
advice of Boromir, it passed the skill of Elf or even Dwarf to 
strike a flame that would hold amid the swirling wind or catch 
in the wet fuel. At last reluctantly Gandalf himself took a 
hand. Picking up a faggot he held it aloft for a moment, and 
then with a word of command, naur an edraith ammen! he 
thrust the end of his staff into the midst of it. At once a great 
spout of green and blue flame sprang out, and the wood 
flared and sputtered. 

‘If there are any to see, then I at least am revealed to them,’ 
he said. ‘I have written Gandalf is here in signs that all can 
read from Rivendell to the mouths of Anduin.’ 

But the Company cared no longer for watchers or un- 
friendly eyes. Their hearts were rejoiced to see the light of 
the fire. The wood burned merrily; and though all round it 
the snow hissed, and pools of slush crept under their feet, 
they warmed their hands gladly at the blaze. There they 


THE RING GOES SOUTH 379 


stood, stooping in a circle round the little dancing and blow- 
ing flames. A red light was on their tired and anxious faces; 
behind them the night was like a black wall. 

But the wood was burning fast, and the snow still fell. 


The fire burned low, and the last faggot was thrown on. 

“The night is getting old,’ said Aragorn. “The dawn is not 
far off.’ 

‘If any dawn can pierce these clouds,’ said Gimli. 

Boromir stepped out of the circle and stared up into the 
blackness. “The snow is growing less,’ he said, ‘and the wind 
is quieter.’ 

Frodo gazed wearily at the flakes still falling out of the dark 
to be revealed white for a moment in the light of the dying 
fire; but for a long time he could see no sign of their slacken- 
ing. Then suddenly, as sleep was beginning to creep over 
him again, he was aware that the wind had indeed fallen, and 
the flakes were becoming larger and fewer. Very slowly a dim 
light began to grow. At last the snow stopped altogether. 

As the light grew stronger it showed a silent shrouded 
world. Below their refuge were white humps and domes and 
shapeless deeps beneath which the path that they had trodden 
was altogether lost; but the heights above were hidden in 
great clouds still heavy with the threat of snow. 

Gimli looked up and shook his head. ‘Caradhras has not 
forgiven us,’ he said. ‘He has more snow yet to fling at us, if 
we go on. The sooner we go back and down the better.’ 

To this all agreed, but their retreat was now difficult. It 
might well prove impossible. Only a few paces from the ashes 
of their fire the snow lay many feet deep, higher than the 
heads of the hobbits; in places it had been scooped and piled 
by the wind into great drifts against the cliff. 

‘If Gandalf would go before us with a bright flame, he 
might melt a path for you,’ said Legolas. The storm had 
troubled him little, and he alone of the Company remained 
still light of heart. 

‘If Elves could fly over mountains, they might fetch the Sun 


380 THE FELLOWSHIP OF THE RING 


to save us,’ answered Gandalf. ‘But I must have something to 
work on. I cannot burn snow.’ 

‘Well,’ said Boromir, ‘when heads are at a loss bodies must 
serve, aS we say in my country. The strongest of us must 
seek a way. See! Though all is now snow-clad, our path, as 
we came up, turned about that shoulder of rock down yonder. 
It was there that the snow first began to burden us. If we 
could reach that point, maybe it would prove easier beyond. 
It is no more than a furlong off, I guess.’ 

“Then let us force a path thither, you and I!’ said Aragorn. 

Aragorn was the tallest of the Company, but Boromir, little 
less in height, was broader and heavier in build. He led the 
way, and Aragorn followed him. Slowly they moved off, and 
were soon toiling heavily. In places the snow was breast-high, 
and often Boromir seemed to be swimming or burrowing 
with his great arms rather than walking. 

Legolas watched them for a while with a smile upon his 
lips, and then he turned to the others. “The strongest must 
seek a way, say you? But I say: let a ploughman plough, but 
choose an otter for swimming, and for running light over 
grass and leaf, or over snow — an Elf.’ 

With that he sprang forth nimbly, and then Frodo noticed 
as if for the first time, though he had long known it, that the 
Elf had no boots, but wore only light shoes, as he always did, 
and his feet made little imprint in the snow. 

‘Farewell!’ he said to Gandalf. ‘I go to find the Sun!’ Then 
swift as a runner over firm sand he shot away, and quickly 
overtaking the toiling men, with a wave of his hand he passed 
them, and sped into the distance, and vanished round the 
rocky turn. 


The others waited huddled together, watching until 
Boromir and Aragorn dwindled into black specks in the 
whiteness. At length they too passed from sight. The time 
dragged on. The clouds lowered, and now a few flakes of 
snow came curling down again. 

An hour, maybe, went by, though it seemed far longer, 


THE RING GOES SOUTH 381 


and then at last they saw Legolas coming back. At the same 
time Boromir and Aragorn reappeared round the bend far 
behind him and came labouring up the slope. 

‘Well,’ cried Legolas as he ran up, ‘I have not brought the 
Sun. She is walking in the blue fields of the South, and a little 
wreath of snow on this Redhorn hillock troubles her not at 
all. But I have brought back a gleam of good hope for those 
who are doomed to go on feet. There is the greatest wind-drift 
of all just beyond the turn, and there our Strong Men were 
almost buried. They despaired, until I returned and told them 
that the drift was little wider than a wall. And on the other 
side the snow suddenly grows less, while further down it is 
no more than a white coverlet to cool a hobbit’s toes.’ 

‘Ah, it is as I said,’ growled Gimli. ‘It was no ordinary 
storm. It is the ill will of Caradhras. He does not love Elves 
and Dwarves, and that drift was laid to cut off our escape.’ 

‘But happily your Caradhras has forgotten that you have 
Men with you,’ said Boromir, who came up at that moment. 
‘And doughty Men too, if I may say it; though lesser men 
with spades might have served you better. Still, we have 
thrust a lane through the drift; and for that all here may be 
grateful who cannot run as light as Elves.’ 

‘But how are we to get down there, even if you have cut 
through the drift?’ said Pippin, voicing the thought of all the 
hobbits. 

‘Have hope!’ said Boromir. ‘I am weary, but I still have 
some strength left, and Aragorn too. We will bear the little 
folk. The others no doubt will make shift to tread the path 
behind us. Come, Master Peregrin! I will begin with you.’ 

He lifted up the hobbit. ‘Cling to my back! I shall need my 
arms,’ he said and strode forward. Aragorn with Merry came 
behind. Pippin marvelled at his strength, seeing the passage 
that he had already forced with no other tool than his great 
limbs. Even now, burdened as he was, he was widening the 
track for those who followed, thrusting the snow aside as 
he went. 

They came at length to the great drift. It was flung across 


382 THE FELLOWSHIP OF THE RING 


the mountain-path like a sheer and sudden wall, and its crest, 
sharp as if shaped with knives, reared up more than twice the 
height of Boromir; but through the middle a passage had 
been beaten, rising and falling like a bridge. On the far side 
Merry and Pippin were set down, and there they waited with 
Legolas for the rest of the Company to arrive. 

After a while Boromir returned carrying Sam. Behind in 
the narrow but now well-trodden track came Gandalf, leading 
Bill with Gimli perched among the baggage. Last came 
Aragorn carrying Frodo. They passed through the lane; but 
hardly had Frodo touched the ground when with a deep 
rumble there rolled down a fall of stones and slithering snow. 
The spray of it half blinded the Company as they crouched 
against the cliff, and when the air cleared again they saw that 
the path was blocked behind them. 

‘Enough, enough!’ cried Gimli. ‘We are departing as quickly 
as we may!’ And indeed with that last stroke the malice of the 
mountain seemed to be expended, as if Caradhras was satisfied 
that the invaders had been beaten off and would not dare to 
return. The threat of snow lifted; the clouds began to break 
and the light grew broader. 

As Legolas had reported, they found that the snow became 
steadily more shallow as they went down, so that even the 
hobbits could trudge along. Soon they all stood once more 
on the flat shelf at the head of the steep slope where they had 
felt the first flakes of snow the night before. 

The morning was now far advanced. From the high place 
they looked back westwards over the lower lands. Far away 
in the tumble of country that lay at the foot of the mountain 
was the dell from which they had started to climb the pass. 

Frodo’s legs ached. He was chilled to the bone and hungry; 
and his head was dizzy as he thought of the long and painful 
march downhill. Black specks swam before his eyes. He 
rubbed them, but the black specks remained. In the distance 
below him, but still high above the lower foothills, dark dots 
were circling in the air. 

“The birds again!’ said Aragorn, pointing down. 


THE RING GOES SOUTH 383 


“That cannot be helped now,’ said Gandalf. ‘Whether they 
are good or evil, or have nothing to do with us at all, we must 
go down at once. Not even on the knees of Caradhras will 
we wait for another night-fall!’ 

A cold wind flowed down behind them, as they turned 
their backs on the Redhorn Gate, and stumbled wearily down 
the slope. Caradhras had defeated them. 


Chapter 4 


A JOURNEY IN THE DARK 


It was evening, and the grey light was again waning fast, 
when they halted for the night. They were very weary. The 
mountains were veiled in deepening dusk, and the wind was 
cold. Gandalf spared them one more mouthful each of the 
miruvor of Rivendell. When they had eaten some food he 
called a council. 

‘We cannot, of course, go on again tonight,’ he said. “The 
attack on the Redhorn Gate has tired us out, and we must 
rest here for a while.’ 

‘And then where are we to go?’ asked Frodo. 

‘We still have our journey and our errand before us,’ 
answered Gandalf. ‘We have no choice but to go on, or to 
return to Rivendell.’ 

Pippin’s face brightened visibly at the mere mention of 
return to Rivendell; Merry and Sam looked up hopefully. But 
Aragorn and Boromir made no sign. Frodo looked troubled. 

‘I wish I was back there,’ he said. ‘But how can I return 
without shame — unless there is indeed no other way, and we 
are already defeated?’ 

“You are right, Frodo,’ said Gandalf: ‘to go back is to admit 
defeat, and face worse defeat to come. If we go back now, 
then the Ring must remain there: we shall not be able to set 
out again. Then sooner or later Rivendell will be besieged, 
and after a brief and bitter time it will be destroyed. The 
Ringwraiths are deadly enemies, but they are only shadows 
yet of the power and terror they would possess if the Ruling 
Ring was on their master’s hand again.’ 

“Then we must go on, if there is a way,’ said Frodo with a 
sigh. Sam sank back into gloom. 

“There is a way that we may attempt,’ said Gandalf. ‘I 


A JOURNEY IN THE DARK 385 


thought from the beginning, when first I considered this jour- 
ney, that we should try it. But it is not a pleasant way, and I 
have not spoken of it to the Company before. Aragorn was 
against it, until the pass over the mountains had at least been 
tried.’ 

‘If it is a worse road than the Redhorn Gate, then it must 
be evil indeed,’ said Merry. ‘But you had better tell us about 
it, and let us know the worst at once.’ 

“The road that I speak of leads to the Mines of Moria,’ said 
Gandalf. Only Gimli lifted up his head; a smouldering fire 
was in his eyes. On all the others a dread fell at the mention 
of that name. Even to the hobbits it was a legend of vague 
fear. 

“The road may lead to Moria, but how can we hope that it 
will lead through Moria?’ said Aragorn darkly. 

‘It is a name of ill omen,’ said Boromir. ‘Nor do I see the 
need to go there. If we cannot cross the mountains, let us 
journey southwards, until we come to the Gap of Rohan, 
where men are friendly to my people, taking the road that I 
followed on my way hither. Or we might pass by and cross 
the Isen into Langstrand and Lebennin, and so come to 
Gondor from the regions nigh to the sea.’ 

“Things have changed since you came north, Boromir,’ 
answered Gandalf. ‘Did you not hear what I told you of 
Saruman? With him I may have business of my own ere all 
is over. But the Ring must not come near Isengard, if that 
can by any means be prevented. The Gap of Rohan is closed 
to us while we go with the Bearer. 

‘As for the longer road: we cannot afford the time. We 
might spend a year in such a journey, and we should pass 
through many lands that are empty and harbourless. Yet they 
would not be safe. The watchful eyes both of Saruman and 
of the Enemy are on them. When you came north, Boromir, 
you were in the Enemy’s eyes only one stray wanderer from 
the South and a matter of small concern to him: his mind 
was busy with the pursuit of the Ring. But you return now 
as a member of the Ring’s Company, and you are in peril as 


386 THE FELLOWSHIP OF THE RING 


long as you remain with us. The danger will increase with 
every league that we go south under the naked sky. 

‘Since our open attempt on the mountain-pass our plight 
has become more desperate, I fear. I see now little hope, 
if we do not soon vanish from sight for a while, and cover 
our trail. Therefore I advise that we should go neither over 
the mountains, nor round them, but under them. That is 
a road at any rate that the Enemy will least expect us to 
take.’ 

‘We do not know what he expects,’ said Boromir. ‘He may 
watch all roads, likely and unlikely. In that case to enter Moria 
would be to walk into a trap, hardly better than knocking at 
the gates of the Dark Tower itself. The name of Moria is 
black.’ 

“You speak of what you do not know, when you liken 
Moria to the stronghold of Sauron,’ answered Gandalf. ‘I 
alone of you have ever been in the dungeons of the Dark 
Lord, and only in his older and lesser dwelling in Dol Guldur. 
Those who pass the gates of Barad-dir do not return. But I 
would not lead you into Moria if there were no hope of 
coming out again. If there are Orcs there, it may prove ill for 
us, that is true. But most of the Orcs of the Misty Mountains 
were scattered or destroyed in the Battle of Five Armies. The 
Eagles report that Orcs are gathering again from afar; but 
there is a hope that Moria is still free. 

“There is even a chance that Dwarves are there, and that 
in some deep hall of his fathers, Balin son of Fundin may be 
found. However it may prove, one must tread the path that 
need chooses!’ 

‘I will tread the path with you, Gandalf! said Gimli. ‘T will 
go and look on the halls of Durin, whatever may wait there 
— if you can find the doors that are shut.’ 

‘Good, Gimli!’ said Gandalf. “You encourage me. We will 
seek the hidden doors together. And we will come through. 
In the ruins of the Dwarves, a dwarf’s head will be less easy 
to bewilder than Elves or Men or Hobbits. Yet it will not be 
the first time that I have been to Moria. I sought there long 


A JOURNEY IN THE DARK 387 


for Thrain son of Thror after he was lost. I passed through, 
and I came out again alive!’ 

‘I too once passed the Dimrill Gate,’ said Aragorn quietly; 
‘but though I also came out again, the memory is very evil. I 
do not wish to enter Moria a second time.’ 

‘And I don’t wish to enter it even once,’ said Pippin. 

‘Nor me,’ muttered Sam. 

‘Of course not!’ said Gandalf. “Who would? But the ques- 
tion is: who will follow me, if I lead you there?’ 

‘T will,’ said Gimli eagerly. 

‘T will,’ said Aragorn heavily. “You followed my lead almost 
to disaster in the snow, and have said no word of blame. I 
will follow your lead now — if this last warning does not move 
you. It is not of the Ring, nor of us others that I am thinking 
now, but of you, Gandalf. And I say to you: if you pass the 
doors of Moria, beware!’ 

‘T will not go,’ said Boromir; ‘not unless the vote of 
the whole Company is against me. What do Legolas and the 
little folk say? The Ring-bearer’s voice surely should be 
heard?’ 

‘I do not wish to go to Moria,’ said Legolas. 

The hobbits said nothing. Sam looked at Frodo. At last 
Frodo spoke. ‘I do not wish to go,’ he said; ‘but neither do I 
wish to refuse the advice of Gandalf. I beg that there should 
be no vote, until we have slept on it. Gandalf will get votes 
easier in the light of the morning than in this cold gloom. 
How the wind howls!’ 

At these words all fell into silent thought. They heard the 
wind hissing among the rocks and trees, and there was a 
howling and wailing round them in the empty spaces of the 
night. 


Suddenly Aragorn leapt to his feet. ‘How the wind howls!’ 
he cried. ‘It is howling with wolf-voices. The Wargs have 
come west of the Mountains!’ 

‘Need we wait until morning then?’ said Gandalf. ‘It is as 
I said. The hunt is up! Even if we live to see the dawn, who 


388 THE FELLOWSHIP OF THE RING 


now will wish to journey south by night with the wild wolves 
on his trail?’ 

‘How far is Moria?’ asked Boromir. 

“There was a door south-west of Caradhras, some fifteen 
miles as the crow flies, and maybe twenty as the wolf runs,’ 
answered Gandalf grimly. 

“Then let us start as soon as it is light tomorrow, if we can,’ 
said Boromir. “The wolf that one hears is worse than the orc 
that one fears.’ 

“True! said Aragorn, loosening his sword in its sheath. 
‘But where the warg howls, there also the orc prowls.’ 

‘I wish I had taken Elrond’s advice,’ muttered Pippin to 
Sam. ‘I am no good after all. There is not enough of the 
breed of Bandobras the Bullroarer in me: these howls freeze 
my blood. I don’t ever remember feeling so wretched.’ 

‘My heart’s right down in my toes, Mr. Pippin,’ said Sam. 
‘But we aren’t etten yet, and there are some stout folk here 
with us. Whatever may be in store for old Gandalf, Pll wager 
it isn’t a wolf’s belly.’ 


For their defence in the night the Company climbed to the 
top of the small hill under which they had been sheltering. It 
was crowned with a knot of old and twisted trees, about 
which lay a broken circle of boulder-stones. In the midst of 
this they lit a fire, for there was no hope that darkness and 
silence would keep their trail from discovery by the hunting 
packs. 

Round the fire they sat, and those that were not on guard 
dozed uneasily. Poor Bill the pony trembled and sweated 
where he stood. The howling of the wolves was now all round 
them, sometimes nearer and sometimes further off. In the 
dead of night many shining eyes were seen peering over the 
brow of the hill. Some advanced almost to the ring of stones. 
At a gap in the circle a great dark wolf-shape could be 
seen halted, gazing at them. A shuddering howl broke from 
him, as if he were a captain summoning his pack to the 
assault. 


A JOURNEY IN THE DARK 389 


Gandalf stood up and strode forward, holding his staff 
aloft. “Listen, Hound of Sauron!’ he cried. ‘Gandalf is here. 
Fly, if you value your foul skin! I will shrivel you from tail to 
snout, if you come within this ring.’ 

The wolf snarled and sprang towards them with a great 
leap. At that moment there was a sharp twang. Legolas had 
loosed his bow. There was a hideous yell, and the leaping 
shape thudded to the ground; the Elvish arrow had pierced 
its throat. The watching eyes were suddenly extinguished. 
Gandalf and Aragorn strode forward, but the hill was 
deserted; the hunting packs had fled. All about them the 
darkness grew silent, and no cry came on the sighing wind. 


The night was old, and westward the waning moon was 
setting, gleaming fitfully through the breaking clouds. Sud- 
denly Frodo started from sleep. Without warning a storm of 
howls broke out fierce and wild all about the camp. A great 
host of Wargs had gathered silently and was now attacking 
them from every side at once. 

‘Fling fuel on the fire!’ cried Gandalf to the hobbits. “Draw 
your blades, and stand back to back!’ 

In the leaping light, as the fresh wood blazed up, Frodo 
saw many grey shapes spring over the ring of stones. More 
and more followed. Through the throat of one huge leader 
Aragorn passed his sword with a thrust; with a great sweep 
Boromir hewed the head off another. Beside them Gimli 
stood with his stout legs apart, wielding his dwarf-axe. The 
bow of Legolas was singing. 

In the wavering firelight Gandalf seemed suddenly to grow: 
he rose up, a great menacing shape like the monument of 
some ancient king of stone set upon a hill. Stooping like a 
cloud, he lifted a burning branch and strode to meet the 
wolves. They gave back before him. High in the air he tossed 
the blazing brand. It flared with a sudden white radiance like 
lightning; and his voice rolled like thunder. 

‘Naur an edraith ammen! Naur dan 1 ngaurhoth? he cried. 

There was a roar and a crackle, and the tree above him 


390 THE FELLOWSHIP OF THE RING 


burst into a leaf and bloom of blinding flame. The fire leapt 
from tree-top to tree-top. The whole hill was crowned with 
dazzling light. The swords and knives of the defenders shone 
and flickered. The last arrow of Legolas kindled in the air 
as it flew, and plunged burning into the heart of a great 
wolf-chieftain. All the others fled. 

Slowly the fire died till nothing was left but falling ash and 
sparks; a bitter smoke curled above the burned tree-stumps, 
and blew darkly from the hill, as the first light of dawn came 
dimly in the sky. Their enemies were routed and did not 
return. 

‘What did I tell you, Mr. Pippin?’ said Sam, sheathing his 
sword. ‘Wolves won’t get him. That was an eye-opener, and 
no mistake! Nearly singed the hair off my head!’ 


When the full light of the morning came no signs of 
the wolves were to be found, and they looked in vain for the 
bodies of the dead. No trace of the fight remained but the 
charred trees and the arrows of Legolas lying on the hill-top. 
All were undamaged save one of which only the point was 
left. 

‘It is as I feared,’ said Gandalf. “These were no ordinary 
wolves hunting for food in the wilderness. Let us eat quickly 
and go!’ 

That day the weather changed again, almost as if it was 
at the command of some power that had no longer any use 
for snow, since they had retreated from the pass, a power 
that wished now to have a clear light in which things that 
moved in the wild could be seen from far away. The wind 
had been turning through north to north-west during the 
night, and now it failed. The clouds vanished southwards 
and the sky was opened, high and blue. As they stood upon 
the hillside, ready to depart, a pale sunlight gleamed over the 
mountain-tops. 

‘We must reach the doors before sunset,’ said Gandalf, ‘or 
I fear we shall not reach them at all. It is not far, but our path 
may be winding, for here Aragorn cannot guide us; he has 


A JOURNEY IN THE DARK 391 


seldom walked in this country, and only once have I been 
under the west wall of Moria, and that was long ago. 

“There it lies,’ he said, pointing away south-eastwards to 
where the mountains’ sides fell sheer into the shadows at their 
feet. In the distance could be dimly seen a line of bare cliffs, 
and in their midst, taller than the rest, one great grey wall. 
‘When we left the pass I led you southwards, and not back 
to our starting point, as some of you may have noticed. It is 
well that I did so, for now we have several miles less to cross, 
and haste is needed. Let us go!’ 

‘I do not know which to hope,’ said Boromir grimly: ‘that 
Gandalf will find what he seeks, or that coming to the cliff 
we shall find the gates lost for ever. All choices seem ill, and 
to be caught between wolves and the wall the likeliest chance. 
Lead on!’ 


Gimli now walked ahead by the wizard’s side, so eager was 
he to come to Moria. Together they led the Company back 
towards the mountains. The only road of old to Moria from 
the west had lain along the course of a stream, the Sirannon, 
that ran out from the feet of the cliffs near where the doors 
had stood. But either Gandalf was astray, or else the land 
had changed in recent years; for he did not strike the stream 
where he looked to find it, only a few miles southwards from 
their start. 

‘The morning was passing towards noon, and still the Com- 
pany wandered and scrambled in a barren country of red 
stones. Nowhere could they see any gleam of water or hear 
any sound of it. All was bleak and dry. Their hearts sank. 
They saw no living thing, and not a bird was in the sky; but 
what the night would bring, if it caught them in that lost land, 
none of them cared to think. 

Suddenly Gimli, who had pressed on ahead, called back to 
them. He was standing on a knoll and pointing to the right. 
Hurrying up they saw below them a deep and narrow chan- 
nel. It was empty and silent, and hardly a trickle of water 
flowed among the brown and red-stained stones of its bed; 


392 THE FELLOWSHIP OF THE RING 


but on the near side there was a path, much broken and 
decayed, that wound its way among the ruined walls and 
paving-stones of an ancient highroad. 

‘Ah! Here it is at last!’ said Gandalf. “This is where the 
stream ran: Sirannon, the Gate-stream, they used to call it. 
But what has happened to the water, I cannot guess; it used 
to be swift and noisy. Come! We must hurry on. We are late.’ 


The Company were footsore and tired; but they trudged 
doggedly along the rough and winding track for many miles. 
The sun turned from the noon and began to go west. After 
a brief halt and a hasty meal they went on again. Before them 
the mountains frowned, but their path lay in a deep trough 
of land and they could see only the higher shoulders and the 
far eastward peaks. 

At length they came to a sharp bend. There the road, 
which had been veering southwards between the brink of the 
channel and a steep fall of the land to the left, turned and 
went due east again. Rounding the corner they saw before 
them a low cliff, some five fathoms high, with a broken and 
jagged top. Over it a trickling water dripped, through a wide 
cleft that seemed to have been carved out by a fall that had 
once been strong and full. 

‘Indeed things have changed!’ said Gandalf. ‘But there is 
no mistaking the place. There is all that remains of the Stair 
Falls. If I remember right, there was a flight of steps cut in 
the rock at their side, but the main road wound away left and 
climbed with several loops up to the level ground at the top. 
There used to be a shallow valley beyond the falls right up 
to the Walls of Moria, and the Sirannon flowed through it 
with the road beside it. Let us go and see what things are like 
now!’ 

They found the stone steps without difficulty, and Gimli 
sprang swiftly up them, followed by Gandalf and Frodo. 
When they reached the top they saw that they could go no 
further that way, and the reason for the drying up of the 
Gate-stream was revealed. Behind them the sinking Sun filled 


A JOURNEY IN THE DARK 393 


the cool western sky with glimmering gold. Before them 
stretched a dark still lake. Neither sky nor sunset was reflected 
on its sullen surface. The Sirannon had been dammed and 
had filled all the valley. Beyond the ominous water were 
reared vast cliffs, their stern faces pallid in the fading light: 
final and impassable. No sign of gate or entrance, not a fissure 
or crack could Frodo see in the frowning stone. 

“There are the Walls of Moria,’ said Gandalf, pointing 
across the water. ‘And there the Gate stood once upon a 
time, the Elven Door at the end of the road from Hollin by 
which we have come. But this way is blocked. None of the 
Company, I guess, will wish to swim this gloomy water at the 
end of the day. It has an unwholesome look.’ 

‘We must find a way round the northern edge,’ said Gimli. 
“The first thing for the Company to do is to climb up by the 
main path and see where that will lead us. Even if there were 
no lake, we could not get our baggage-pony up this stair.’ 

‘But in any case we cannot take the poor beast into the 
Mines,’ said Gandalf. “The road under the mountains is a 
dark road, and there are places narrow and steep which he 
cannot tread, even if we can.’ 

‘Poor old Bill? said Frodo. ‘I had not thought of that. And 
poor Sam! I wonder what he will say?’ 

‘I am sorry,’ said Gandalf. ‘Poor Bill has been a useful 
companion, and it goes to my heart to turn him adrift now. 
I would have travelled lighter and brought no animal, least of 
all this one that Sam is fond of, if I had had my way. I feared 
all along that we should be obliged to take this road.’ 


The day was drawing to its end, and cold stars were glinting 
in the sky high above the sunset, when the Company, with 
all the speed they could, climbed up the slopes and reached 
the side of the lake. In breadth it looked to be no more than 
two or three furlongs at the widest point. How far it stretched 
away southward they could not see in the failing light; but its 
northern end was no more than half a mile from where they 
stood, and between the stony ridges that enclosed the valley 


394 THE FELLOWSHIP OF THE RING 


and the water’s edge there was a rim of open ground. They 
hurried forward, for they had still a mile or two to go before 
they could reach the point on the far shore that Gandalf was 
making for; and then he had still to find the doors. 

When they came to the northernmost corner of the lake 
they found a narrow creek that barred their way. It was green 
and stagnant, thrust out like a slimy arm towards the enclos- 
ing hills. Gimli strode forward undeterred, and found that 
the water was shallow, no more than ankle-deep at the edge. 
Behind him they walked in file, threading their way with care, 
for under the weedy pools were sliding and greasy stones, 
and footing was treacherous. Frodo shuddered with disgust 
at the touch of the dark unclean water on his feet. 

As Sam, the last of the Company, led Bill up on to the dry 
ground on the far side, there came a soft sound: a swish, 
followed by a plop, as if a fish had disturbed the still surface 
of the water. Turning quickly they saw ripples, black-edged 
with shadow in the waning light: great rings were widening 
outwards from a point far out in the lake. There was a bub- 
bling noise, and then silence. The dusk deepened, and the 
last gleams of the sunset were veiled in cloud. 

Gandalf now pressed on at a great pace, and the others 
followed as quickly as they could. They reached the strip of 
dry land between the lake and the cliffs: it was narrow, often 
hardly a dozen yards across, and encumbered with fallen rock 
and stones; but they found a way, hugging the cliff, and 
keeping as far from the dark water as they might. A mile 
southwards along the shore they came upon holly trees. 
Stumps and dead boughs were rotting in the shallows, the 
remains it seemed of old thickets, or of a hedge that had once 
lined the road across the drowned valley. But close under the 
cliff there stood, still strong and living, two tall trees, larger 
than any trees of holly that Frodo had ever seen or imagined. 
Their great roots spread from the wall to the water. Under 
the looming cliffs they had looked like mere bushes, when 
seen far off from the top of the Stair; but now they towered 
overhead, stiff, dark, and silent, throwing deep night-shadows 


A JOURNEY IN THE DARK 395 


about their feet, standing like sentinel pillars at the end of the 
road. 

‘Well, here we are at last!’ said Gandalf. ‘Here the Elven- 
way from Hollin ended. Holly was the token of the people of 
that land, and they planted it here to mark the end of their 
domain; for the West-door was made chiefly for their use in 
their traffic with the Lords of Moria. Those were happier 
days, when there was still close friendship at times between 
folk of different race, even between Dwarves and Elves.’ 

‘It was not the fault of the Dwarves that the friendship 
waned,’ said Gimli. 

‘I have not heard that it was the fault of the Elves,’ said 
Legolas. 

‘I have heard both,’ said Gandalf; ‘and I will not give 
judgement now. But I beg you two, Legolas and Gimli, at 
least to be friends, and to help me. I need you both. The 
doors are shut and hidden, and the sooner we find them the 
better. Night is at hand!’ 

‘Turning to the others he said: ‘While I am searching, will 
you each make ready to enter the Mines? For here I fear we 
must say farewell to our good beast of burden. You must lay 
aside much of the stuff that we brought against bitter weather: 
you will not need it inside, nor, I hope, when we come 
through and journey on down into the South. Instead each 
of us must take a share of what the pony carried, especially 
the food and the water-skins.’ 

‘But you can’t leave poor old Bill behind in this forsaken 
place, Mr. Gandalf! cried Sam, angry and distressed. ‘I 
won’t have it, and that’s flat. After he has come so far and 
all!’ 

‘I am sorry, Sam,’ said the wizard. ‘But when the Door 
opens I do not think you will be able to drag your Bill inside, 
into the long dark of Moria. You will have to choose between 
Bill and your master.’ 

‘He’d follow Mr. Frodo into a dragon’s den, if I led him,’ 
protested Sam. ‘It’d be nothing short of murder to turn him 
loose with all these wolves about.’ 


396 THE FELLOWSHIP OF THE RING 


‘It will be short of murder, I hope,’ said Gandalf. He laid 
his hand on the pony’s head, and spoke in a low voice. ‘Go 
with words of guard and guiding on you,’ he said. ‘You are 
a wise beast, and have learned much in Rivendell. Make your 
ways to places where you can find grass, and so come in time 
to Elrond’s house, or wherever you wish to go. 

“There, Sam! He will have quite as much chance of escap- 
ing wolves and getting home as we have.’ 

Sam stood sullenly by the pony and returned no answer. 
Bill, seeming to understand well what was going on, nuzzled 
up to him, putting his nose to Sam’s ear. Sam burst into 
tears, and fumbled with the straps, unlading all the pony’s 
packs and throwing them on the ground. The others sorted 
out the goods, making a pile of all that could be left behind, 
and dividing up the rest. 

When this was done they turned to watch Gandalf. He 
appeared to have done nothing. He was standing between 
the two trees gazing at the blank wall of the cliff, as if he 
would bore a hole into it with his eyes. Gimli was wandering 
about, tapping the stone here and there with his axe. Legolas 
was pressed against the rock, as if listening. 

‘Well, here we are and all ready,’ said Merry; ‘but where 
are the Doors? I can’t see any sign of them.’ 

‘Dwarf-doors are not made to be seen when shut,’ said 
Gimli. ‘They are invisible, and their own makers cannot find 
them or open them, if their secret is forgotten.’ 

‘But this Door was not made to be a secret known only to 
Dwarves,’ said Gandalf, coming suddenly to life and turning 
round. ‘Unless things are altogether changed, eyes that know 
what to look for may discover the signs.’ 

He walked forward to the wall. Right between the shadow 
of the trees there was a smooth space, and over this he passed 
his hands to and fro, muttering words under his breath. Then 
he stepped back. 

‘Look!’ he said. “Can you see anything now?’ 

The Moon now shone upon the grey face of the rock; but 
they could see nothing else for a while. Then slowly on the 


A JOURNEY IN THE DARK 397 


surface, where the wizard’s hands had passed, faint lines 
appeared, like slender veins of silver running in the stone. At 
first they were no more than pale gossamer-threads, so fine 
that they only twinkled fitfully where the Moon caught them, 
but steadily they grew broader and clearer, until their design 
could be guessed. 

At the top, as high as Gandalf could reach, was an arch of 
interlacing letters in an Elvish character. Below, though the 
threads were in places blurred or broken, the outline could 
be seen of an anvil and a hammer surmounted by a crown 
with seven stars. Beneath these again were two trees, each 
bearing crescent moons. More clearly than all else there shone 
forth in the middle of the door a single star with many rays. 

“There are the emblems of Durin!’ cried Gimli. 

‘And there is the Tree of the High Elves!’ said Legolas. 

‘And the Star of the House of Féanor,’ said Gandalf. “They 
are wrought of 7thildin that mirrors only starlight and moon- 
light, and sleeps until it is touched by one who speaks words 
now long forgotten in Middle-earth. It is long since I heard 
them, and I thought deeply before I could recall them to my 
mind.’ 

‘What does the writing say?’ asked Frodo, who was trying 
to decipher the inscription on the arch. ‘I thought I knew the 
elf-letters, but I cannot read these.’ 

“The words are in the elven-tongue of the West of Middle- 
earth in the Elder Days,’ answered Gandalf. ‘But they do not 
say anything of importance to us. They say only: The Doors of 
Durin, Lord of Moria. Speak, friend, and enter. And underneath 
small and faint is written: I, Narvi, made them. Celebrimbor of 
Hollin drew these signs.’ 

‘What does it mean by speak, friend, and enter?’ asked 
Merry. 

“That is plain enough,’ said Gimli. ‘If you are a friend, 
speak the password, and the doors will open, and you can 
enter.’ 

‘Yes,’ said Gandalf, ‘these doors are probably governed by 
words. Some dwarf-gates will open only at special times, or 


398 THE FELLOWSHIP OF THE RING 


Rere’is written in the Fetinorian characters accord- 
to a Beleriand: Gunyn Durin Aran, 


oria: pedo m aminno.}m Larvi hainec 


ant: Celebrimboro Creation teithanti thiwhi 


A JOURNEY IN THE DARK 399 


for particular persons; and some have locks and keys that are 
still needed when all necessary times and words are known. 
These doors have no key. In the days of Durin they were not 
secret. They usually stood open and doorwards sat here. But 
if they were shut, any who knew the opening word could 
speak it and pass in. At least so it is recorded, is it not, Gimli?’ 

‘It is,’ said the dwarf. ‘But what the word was is not 
remembered. Narvi and his craft and all his kindred have 
vanished from the earth.’ 

‘But do not you know the word, Gandalf?’ asked Boromir 
in surprise. 

‘No!’ said the wizard. 

The others looked dismayed; only Aragorn, who knew 
Gandalf well, remained silent and unmoved. 

“Then what was the use of bringing us to this accursed 
spot?’ cried Boromir, glancing back with a shudder at the 
dark water. ‘You told us that you had once passed through 
the Mines. How could that be, if you did not know how to 
enter?’ 

“The answer to your first question, Boromir,’ said the wiz- 
ard, ‘is that I do not know the word — yet. But we shall soon 
see. And,’ he added, with a glint in his eyes under their 
bristling brows, ‘you may ask what is the use of my deeds 
when they are proved useless. As for your other question: do 
you doubt my tale? Or have you no wits left? I did not enter 
this way. I came from the East. 

‘If you wish to know, I will tell you that these doors open 
outwards. From the inside you may thrust them open with 
your hands. From the outside nothing will move them save 
the spell of command. They cannot be forced inwards.’ 

‘What are you going to do then?’ asked Pippin, undaunted 
by the wizard’s bristling brows. 

‘Knock on the doors with your head, Peregrin Took,’ said 
Gandalf. ‘But if that does not shatter them, and I am allowed 
a little peace from foolish questions, I will seek for the opening 
words. 

‘IT once knew every spell in all the tongues of Elves or Men 


400 THE FELLOWSHIP OF THE RING 


or Orcs, that was ever used for such a purpose. I can still 
remember ten score of them without searching in my mind. 
But only a few trials, I think, will be needed; and I shall not 
have to call on Gimli for words of the secret dwarf-tongue 
that they teach to none. The opening words were Elvish, like 
the writing on the arch: that seems certain.’ 

He stepped up to the rock again, and lightly touched with 
his staff the silver star in the middle beneath the sign of the 
anvil. 


Annon edhellen, edro hi ammen! 
Fennas nogothrim, lasto beth lammen! 


he said in a commanding voice. ‘The silver lines faded, but 
the blank grey stone did not stir. 

Many times he repeated these words in different order, or 
varied them. Then he tried other spells, one after another, 
speaking now faster and louder, now soft and slow. Then 
he spoke many single words of Elvish speech. Nothing hap- 
pened. The cliff towered into the night, the countless stars 
were kindled, the wind blew cold, and the doors stood fast. 

Again Gandalf approached the wall, and lifting up his arms 
he spoke in tones of command and rising wrath. Edro, edro! 
he cried, and struck the rock with his staff. Open, open! he 
shouted, and followed it with the same command in every 
language that had ever been spoken in the West of Middle- 
earth. Then he threw his staff on the ground, and sat down 
in silence. 


At that moment from far off the wind bore to their listening 
ears the howling of wolves. Bill the pony started in fear, and 
Sam sprang to his side and whispered softly to him. 

‘Do not let him run away!’ said Boromir. ‘It seems that we 
shall need him still, if the wolves do not find us. How I hate 
this foul pool!’ He stooped and picking up a large stone he 
cast it far into the dark water. 

The stone vanished with a soft slap; but at the same instant 


A JOURNEY IN THE DARK Aol 


there was a swish and a bubble. Great rippling rings formed 
on the surface out beyond where the stone had fallen, and 
they moved slowly towards the foot of the cliff. 

‘Why did you do that, Boromir?’ said Frodo. ‘I hate this 
place, too, and I am afraid. I don’t know of what: not of 
wolves, or the dark behind the doors, but of something else. 
Iam afraid of the pool. Don’t disturb it!’ 

‘I wish we could get away!’ said Merry. 

‘Why doesn’t Gandalf do something quick?’ said Pippin. 

Gandalf took no notice of them. He sat with his head 
bowed, either in despair or in anxious thought. The mournful 
howling of the wolves was heard again. The ripples on the 
water grew and came closer; some were already lapping on 
the shore. 

With a suddenness that startled them all the wizard sprang 
to his feet. He was laughing! ‘I have it!’ he cried. ‘Of course, 
of course! Absurdly simple, like most riddles when you see 
the answer.’ 

Picking up his staff he stood before the rock and said in a 
clear voice: Mellon! 

The star shone out briefly and faded again. Then silently 
a great doorway was outlined, though not a crack or joint had 
been visible before. Slowly it divided in the middle and swung 
outwards inch by inch, until both doors lay back against the 
wall. Through the opening a shadowy stair could be seen 
climbing steeply up; but beyond the lower steps the darkness 
was deeper than the night. The Company stared in wonder. 

‘I was wrong after all,’ said Gandalf, ‘and Gimli too. Merry, 
of all people, was on the right track. The opening word was 
inscribed on the archway all the time! The translation should 
have been: Say “Friend” and enter. I had only to speak the 
Elvish word for friend and the doors opened. Quite simple. 
Too simple for a learned lore-master in these suspicious days. 
‘Those were happier times. Now let us go!’ 


He strode forward and set his foot on the lowest step. 
But at that moment several things happened. Frodo felt 


402 THE FELLOWSHIP OF THE RING 


something seize him by the ankle, and he fell with a cry. Bill 
the pony gave a wild neigh of fear, and turned tail and dashed 
away along the lakeside into the darkness. Sam leaped after 
him, and then hearing Frodo’s cry he ran back again, weeping 
and cursing. The others swung round and saw the waters of 
the lake seething, as if a host of snakes were swimming up 
from the southern end. 

Out from the water a long sinuous tentacle had crawled; it 
was pale-green and luminous and wet. Its fingered end had 
hold of Frodo’s foot, and was dragging him into the water. 
Sam on his knees was now slashing at it with a knife. 

The arm let go of Frodo, and Sam pulled him away, crying 
out for help. Twenty other arms came rippling out. The dark 
water boiled, and there was a hideous stench. 

‘Into the gateway! Up the stairs! Quick!’ shouted Gandalf 
leaping back. Rousing them from the horror that seemed to 
have rooted all but Sam to the ground where they stood, he 
drove them forward. 

They were just in time. Sam and Frodo were only a few 
steps up, and Gandalf had just begun to climb, when the 
groping tentacles writhed across the narrow shore and fin- 
gered the cliff-wall and the doors. One came wriggling over 
the threshold, glistening in the starlight. Gandalf turned and 
paused. If he was considering what word would close the 
gate again from within, there was no need. Many coiling arms 
seized the doors on either side, and with horrible strength, 
swung them round. With a shattering echo they slammed, 
and all light was lost. A noise of rending and crashing came 
dully through the ponderous stone. 

Sam, clinging to Frodo’s arm, collapsed on a step in the black 
darkness. ‘Poor old Bill!’ he said in a choking voice. ‘Poor old 
Bill! Wolves and snakes! But the snakes were too much for him. 
Thad to choose, Mr. Frodo. I had to come with you.’ 

They heard Gandalf go back down the steps and thrust his 
staff against the doors. There was a quiver in the stone and 
the stairs trembled, but the doors did not open. 

ok k ok 


A JOURNEY IN THE DARK 403 


‘Well, well!’ said the wizard. “The passage is blocked 
behind us now, and there is only one way out — on the other 
side of the mountains. I fear from the sounds that boulders 
have been piled up, and the trees uprooted and thrown across 
the gate. I am sorry; for the trees were beautiful, and had 
stood so long.’ 

‘T felt that something horrible was near from the moment 
that my foot first touched the water,’ said Frodo. ‘What was 
the thing, or were there many of them?’ 

‘I do not know,’ answered Gandalf; ‘but the arms were all 
guided by one purpose. Something has crept, or has been 
driven out of dark waters under the mountains. There are 
older and fouler things than Orcs in the deep places of the 
world.’ He did not speak aloud his thought that whatever it 
was that dwelt in the lake, it had seized on Frodo first among 
all the Company. 

Boromir muttered under his breath, but the echoing stone 
magnified the sound to a hoarse whisper that all could hear: 
‘In the deep places of the world! And thither we are going 
against my wish. Who will lead us now in this deadly dark?’ 

‘T will,’ said Gandalf, ‘and Gimli shall walk with me. Follow 
my staff!’ 


As the wizard passed on ahead up the great steps, he held 
his staff aloft, and from its tip there came a faint radiance. 
The wide stairway was sound and undamaged. Two hundred 
steps they counted, broad and shallow; and at the top they 
found an arched passage with a level floor leading on into the 
dark. 

‘Let us sit and rest and have something to eat, here on the 
landing, since we can’t find a dining-room!’ said Frodo. He 
had begun to shake off the terror of the clutching arm, and 
suddenly he felt extremely hungry. 

The proposal was welcomed by all; and they sat down on 
the upper steps, dim figures in the gloom. After they had 
eaten, Gandalf gave them each a third sip of the miruvor of 
Rivendell. 


404 THE FELLOWSHIP OF THE RING 


‘Tt will not last much longer, I am afraid,’ he said; ‘but I 
think we need it after that horror at the gate. And unless we 
have great luck, we shall need all that is left before we see the 
other side! Go carefully with the water, too! There are many 
streams and wells in the Mines, but they should not be 
touched. We may not have a chance of filling our skins and 
bottles till we come down into Dimrill Dale.’ 

‘How long is that going to take us?’ asked Frodo. 

‘I cannot say,’ answered Gandalf. ‘It depends on many 
chances. But going straight, without mishap or losing our 
way, we shall take three or four marches, I expect. It cannot 
be less than forty miles from West-door to East-gate in a 
direct line, and the road may wind much.’ 


After only a brief rest they started on their way again. All 
were eager to get the journey over as quickly as possible, and 
were willing, tired as they were, to go on marching still for 
several hours. Gandalf walked in front as before. In his left 
hand he held up his glimmering staff, the light of which just 
showed the ground before his feet; in his right he held his 
sword Glamdring. Behind him came Gimli, his eyes glinting 
in the dim light as he turned his head from side to side. 
Behind the dwarf walked Frodo, and he had drawn the short 
sword, Sting. No gleam came from the blades of Sting or of 
Glamdring; and that was some comfort, for being the work 
of Elvish smiths in the Elder Days these swords shone with 
a cold light, if any Orcs were near at hand. Behind Frodo 
went Sam, and after him Legolas, and the young hobbits, 
and Boromir. In the dark at the rear, grim and silent, walked 
Aragorn. 

The passage twisted round a few turns, and then began to 
descend. It went steadily down for a long while before it 
became level once again. The air grew hot and stifling, but it 
was not foul, and at times they felt currents of cooler air upon 
their faces, issuing from half-guessed openings in the walls. 
There were many of these. In the pale ray of the wizard’s 
staff, Frodo caught glimpses of stairs and arches, and of other 


A JOURNEY IN THE DARK 405 


passages and tunnels, sloping up, or running steeply down, 
or opening blankly dark on either side. It was bewildering 
beyond hope of remembering. 

Gimli aided Gandalf very little, except by his stout courage. 
At least he was not, as were most of the others, troubled by 
the mere darkness in itself. Often the wizard consulted him 
at points where the choice of way was doubtful; but it was 
always Gandalf who had the final word. The Mines of Moria 
were vast and intricate beyond the imagination of Gimli, 
Gloin’s son, dwarf of the mountain-race though he was. To 
Gandalf the far-off memories of a journey long before were 
now of little help, but even in the gloom and despite all 
windings of the road he knew whither he wished to go, and 
he did not falter, as long as there was a path that led towards 
his goal. 


‘Do not be afraid!’ said Aragorn. There was a pause longer 
than usual, and Gandalf and Gimli were whispering together; 
the others were crowded behind, waiting anxiously. “Do not 
be afraid! I have been with him on many a journey, if never 
on one so dark; and there are tales in Rivendell of greater 
deeds of his than any that I have seen. He will not go astray 
— if there is any path to find. He has led us in here against 
our fears, but he will lead us out again, at whatever cost to 
himself. He is surer of finding the way home in a blind night 
than the cats of Queen Beruthiel.’ 

It was well for the Company that they had such a guide. 
They had no fuel nor any means of making torches; in the 
desperate scramble at the doors many things had been left 
behind. But without any light they would soon have come to 
grief. There were not only many roads to choose from, there 
were also in many places holes and pitfalls, and dark wells 
beside the path in which their passing feet echoed. There 
were fissures and chasms in the walls and floor, and every 
now and then a crack would open right before their feet. The 
widest was more than seven feet across, and it was long 
before Pippin could summon enough courage to leap over 


406 THE FELLOWSHIP OF THE RING 


the dreadful gap. The noise of churning water came up from 
far below, as if some great mill-wheel was turning in the 
depths. 

‘Rope!’ muttered Sam. ‘I knew I’d want it, if I] hadn’t got it!’ 


As these dangers became more frequent their march 
became slower. Already they seemed to have been tramping 
on, on, endlessly to the mountains’ roots. They were more 
than weary, and yet there seemed no comfort in the thought 
of halting anywhere. Frodo’s spirits had risen for a while after 
his escape, and after food and a draught of the cordial; but 
now a deep uneasiness, growing to dread, crept over him 
again. Though he had been healed in Rivendell of the knife- 
stroke, that grim wound had not been without effect. His 
senses were sharper and more aware of things that could not 
be seen. One sign of change that he soon had noticed was 
that he could see more in the dark than any of his com- 
panions, save perhaps Gandalf. And he was in any case the 
bearer of the Ring: it hung upon its chain against his breast, 
and at whiles it seemed a heavy weight. He felt the certainty 
of evil ahead and of evil following; but he said nothing. He 
gripped tighter on the hilt of his sword and went on doggedly. 

The Company behind him spoke seldom, and then only in 
hurried whispers. There was no sound but the sound of their 
own feet: the dull stump of Gimli’s dwarf-boots; the heavy 
tread of Boromir; the light step of Legolas; the soft, scarce- 
heard patter of hobbit-feet; and in the rear the slow firm 
footfalls of Aragorn with his long stride. When they halted 
for a moment they heard nothing at all, unless it were 
occasionally a faint trickle and drip of unseen water. Yet 
Frodo began to hear, or to imagine that he heard, something 
else: like the faint fall of soft bare feet. It was never loud 
enough, or near enough, for him to feel certain that he heard 
it; but once it had started it never stopped, while the Company 
was moving. But it was not an echo, for when they halted it 
pattered on for a little all by itself, and then grew still. 

ok * ok 


A JOURNEY IN THE DARK 407 


It was after nightfall when they had entered the Mines. 
They had been going for several hours with only brief halts, 
when Gandalf came to his first serious check. Before him 
stood a wide dark arch opening into three passages: all led in 
the same general direction, eastwards; but the left-hand pass- 
age plunged down, while the right-hand climbed up, and the 
middle way seemed to run on, smooth and level but very 
narrow. 

‘Thave no memory of this place at all!’ said Gandalf, stand- 
ing uncertainly under the arch. He held up his staff in the 
hope of finding some marks or inscription that might help 
his choice; but nothing of the kind was to be seen. ‘I am too 
weary to decide,’ he said, shaking his head. ‘And I expect 
that you are all as weary as I am, or wearier. We had better 
halt here for what is left of the night. You know what I mean! 
In here it is ever dark; but outside the late Moon is riding 
westward and the middle-night has passed.’ 

‘Poor old Bill!’ said Sam. ‘I wonder where he is. I hope 
those wolves haven’t got him yet.’ 

To the left of the great arch they found a stone door: it 
was half closed, but swung back easily to a gentle thrust. 
Beyond there seemed to lie a wide chamber cut in the rock. 

‘Steady! Steady!’ cried Gandalf, as Merry and Pippin 
pushed forward, glad to find a place where they could rest 
with at least more feeling of shelter than in the open passage. 
‘Steady! You do not know what is inside yet. I will go first.’ 

He went in cautiously, and the others filed behind. “There!’ 
he said, pointing with his staff to the middle of the floor. 
Before his feet they saw a large round hole like the mouth of 
a well. Broken and rusty chains lay at the edge and trailed 
down into the black pit. Fragments of stone lay near. 

‘One of you might have fallen in and still be wondering 
when you were going to strike the bottom,’ said Aragorn to 
Merry. ‘Let the guide go first while you have one.’ 

“This seems to have been a guardroom, made for the 
watching of the three passages,’ said Gimli. “That hole was 
plainly a well for the guards’ use, covered with a stone lid. 


408 THE FELLOWSHIP OF THE RING 


But the lid is broken, and we must all take care in the dark.’ 

Pippin felt curiously attracted by the well. While the others 
were unrolling blankets and making beds against the walls of 
the chamber, as far as possible from the hole in the floor, he 
crept to the edge and peered over. A chill air seemed to strike 
his face, rising from invisible depths. Moved by a sudden 
impulse he groped for a loose stone, and let it drop. He felt 
his heart beat many times before there was any sound. Then 
far below, as if the stone had fallen into deep water in some 
cavernous place, there came a plunk, very distant, but magni- 
fied and repeated in the hollow shaft. 

“‘What’s that?’ cried Gandalf. He was relieved when Pippin 
confessed what he had done; but he was angry, and Pippin 
could see his eye glinting. ‘Fool of a Took! he growled. 
“This is a serious journey, not a hobbit walking-party. Throw 
yourself in next time, and then you will be no further nuis- 
ance. Now be quiet!’ 

Nothing more was heard for several minutes; but then 
there came out of the depths faint knocks: tom-tap, tap-tom. 
They stopped, and when the echoes had died away, they 
were repeated: tap-tom, tom-tap, tap-tap, tom. They sounded 
disquietingly like signals of some sort; but after a while the 
knocking died away and was not heard again. 

“That was the sound of a hammer, or I have never heard 
one,’ said Gimli. 

‘Yes,’ said Gandalf, ‘and I do not like it. It may have 
nothing to do with Peregrin’s foolish stone; but probably 
something has been disturbed that would have been better 
left quiet. Pray, do nothing of the kind again! Let us hope we 
shall get some rest without further trouble. You, Pippin, can 
go on the first watch, as a reward,’ he growled, as he rolled 
himself in a blanket. 

Pippin sat miserably by the door in the pitch dark; but he 
kept on turning round, fearing that some unknown thing 
would crawl up out of the well. He wished he could cover 
the hole, if only with a blanket, but he dared not move or go 
near it, even though Gandalf seemed to be asleep. 


A JOURNEY IN THE DARK 409 


Actually Gandalf was awake, though lying still and silent. 
He was deep in thought, trying to recall every memory of 
his former journey in the Mines, and considering anxiously 
the next course that he should take; a false turn now might 
be disastrous. After an hour he rose up and came over to 
Pippin. 

‘Get into a corner and have a sleep, my lad,’ he said in a 
kindly tone. ‘You want to sleep, I expect. I cannot get a wink, 
so I may as well do the watching.’ 

‘I know what is the matter with me,’ he muttered, as he sat 
down by the door. ‘I need smoke! I have not tasted it since 
the morning before the snowstorm.’ 

The last thing that Pippin saw, as sleep took him, was a 
dark glimpse of the old wizard huddled on the floor, shielding 
a glowing chip in his gnarled hands between his knees. The 
flicker for a moment showed his sharp nose, and the puff of 
smoke. 


It was Gandalf who roused them all from sleep. He had 
sat and watched all alone for about six hours, and had let the 
others rest. ‘And in the watches I have made up my mind,’ 
he said. ‘I do not like the feel of the middle way; and I do not 
like the smell of the left-hand way: there is foul air down 
there, or I am no guide. I shall take the right-hand passage. 
It is time we began to climb up again.’ 

For eight dark hours, not counting two brief halts, they 
marched on; and they met no danger, and heard nothing, 
and saw nothing but the faint gleam of the wizard’s light, 
bobbing like a will-o’-the-wisp in front of them. The passage 
they had chosen wound steadily upwards. As far as they 
could judge it went in great mounting curves, and as it rose 
it grew loftier and wider. There were now no openings to 
other galleries or tunnels on either side, and the floor was 
level and sound, without pits or cracks. Evidently they had 
struck what once had been an important road; and they went 
forward quicker than they had done on their first march. 

In this way they advanced some fifteen miles, measured in 


AIO THE FELLOWSHIP OF THE RING 


a direct line east, though they must have actually walked 
twenty miles or more. As the road climbed upwards, Frodo’s 
spirits rose a little; but he still felt oppressed, and still at times 
he heard, or thought he heard, away behind the Company 
and beyond the fall and patter of their feet, a following foot- 
step that was not an echo. 


They had marched as far as the hobbits could endure 
without a rest, and all were thinking of a place where they 
could sleep, when suddenly the walls to right and left van- 
ished. They seemed to have passed through some arched 
doorway into a black and empty space. There was a great 
draught of warmer air behind them, and before them the 
darkness was cold on their faces. They halted and crowded 
anxiously together. 

Gandalf seemed pleased. ‘I chose the right way,’ he said. 
‘At last we are coming to the habitable parts, and I guess that 
we are not far now from the eastern side. But we are high 
up, a good deal higher than the Dimrill Gate, unless I am 
mistaken. From the feeling of the air we must be in a wide 
hall. I will now risk a little real light.’ 

He raised his staff, and for a brief instant there was a blaze 
like a flash of lightning. Great shadows sprang up and fled, 
and for a second they saw a vast roof far above their heads 
upheld by many mighty pillars hewn of stone. Before them 
and on either side stretched a huge empty hall; its black walls, 
polished and smooth as glass, flashed and glittered. Three 
other entrances they saw, dark black arches: one straight 
before them eastwards, and one on either side. Then the light 
went out. 

“That is all that I shall venture on for the present,’ said 
Gandalf. “Chere used to be great windows on the mountain- 
side, and shafts leading out to the light in the upper reaches 
of the Mines. I think we have reached them now, but it is 
night outside again, and we cannot tell until morning. If I 
am right, tomorrow we may actually see the morning peeping 
in. But in the meanwhile we had better go no further. Let 


A JOURNEY IN THE DARK AIlI 


us rest, if we can. Things have gone well so far, and the 
greater part of the dark road is over. But we are not through 
yet, and it is a long way down to the Gates that open on the 
world.’ 


The Company spent that night in the great cavernous hall, 
huddled close together in a corner to escape the draught: 
there seemed to be a steady inflow of chill air through the 
eastern archway. All about them as they lay hung the dark- 
ness, hollow and immense, and they were oppressed by the 
loneliness and vastness of the dolven halls and endlessly 
branching stairs and passages. The wildest imaginings that 
dark rumour had ever suggested to the hobbits fell altogether 
short of the actual dread and wonder of Moria. 

“There must have been a mighty crowd of dwarves here at 
one time,’ said Sam; ‘and every one of them busier than 
badgers for five hundred years to make all this, and most in 
hard rock too! What did they do it all for? They didn’t live 
in these darksome holes surely?’ 

“These are not holes,’ said Gimli. “This is the great realm 
and city of the Dwarrowdelf. And of old it was not darksome, 
but full of light and splendour, as is still remembered in our 
songs.’ 

He rose and standing in the dark he began to chant in a 
deep voice, while the echoes ran away into the roof. 


The world was young, the mountains green, 
No stain yet on the Moon was seen, 

No words were laid on stream or stone 
When Durin woke and walked alone. 

He named the nameless hills and dells; 

He drank from yet untasted wells; 

He stooped and looked in Mirrormere, 

And saw a crown of stars appear, 

As gems upon a silver thread, 

Above the shadow of his head. 


412 


THE FELLOWSHIP OF THE RING 


The world was fair, the mountains tall, 
In Elder Days before the fall 

Of mighty kings in Nargothrond 

And Gondolin, who now beyond 

The Western Seas have passed away: 
The world was fair in Durin’s Day. 


A king he was on carven throne 

In many-pillared halls of stone 

With golden roof and silver floor, 
And runes of power upon the door. 
The light of sun and star and moon 
In shining lamps of crystal hewn 
Undimmed by cloud or shade of night 
There shone for ever fair and bright. 


There hammer on the anvil smote, 

There chisel clove, and graver wrote; 

There forged was blade, and bound was hilt; 
The delver mined, the mason built. 

There beryl, pearl, and opal pale, 

And metal wrought like fishes’ mail, 
Buckler and corslet, axe and sword, 

And shining spears were laid in hoard. 


Unwearied then were Durin’s folk; 
Beneath the mountains music woke: 
The harpers harped, the minstrels sang, 
And at the gates the trumpets rang. 


The world ts grey, the mountains old, 
The forge’s fire is ashen-cold; 

No harp ts wrung, no hammer falls: 
The darkness dwells in Durin’s halls; 
The shadow lies upon his tomb 

In Moria, in Khazad-diim. 

But still the sunken stars appear 


A JOURNEY IN THE DARK AI3 


In dark and windless Mirrormere; 
There hes his crown in water deep, 
Till Durin wakes again from sleep. 


‘T like that!’ said Sam. ‘I should like to learn it. In Moria, 
in Khazad-diim! But it makes the darkness seem heavier, 
thinking of all those lamps. Are there piles of jewels and gold 
lying about here still?’ 

Gimli was silent. Having sung his song he would say no 
more. 

‘Piles of jewels?’ said Gandalf. ‘No. The Orcs have often 
plundered Moria; there is nothing left in the upper halls. And 
since the dwarves fled, no one dares to seek the shafts and 
treasuries down in the deep places: they are drowned in water 
— or in a shadow of fear.’ 

“Then what do the dwarves want to come back for?’ asked 
Sam. 

‘For mithril, answered Gandalf. “The wealth of Moria was 
not in gold and jewels, the toys of the Dwarves; nor in iron, 
their servant. Such things they found here, it is true, especially 
iron; but they did not need to delve for them: all things that 
they desired they could obtain in traffic. For here alone in 
the world was found Moria-silver, or true-silver as some have 
called it: mithril is the Elvish name. The Dwarves have a 
name which they do not tell. Its worth was ten times that of 
gold, and now it is beyond price; for little is left above ground, 
and even the Orcs dare not delve here for it. The lodes lead 
away north towards Caradhras, and down to darkness. The 
Dwarves tell no tale; but even as mithril was the foundation 
of their wealth, so also it was their destruction: they delved 
too greedily and too deep, and disturbed that from which 
they fled, Durin’s Bane. Of what they brought to light the 
Orcs have gathered nearly all, and given it in tribute to 
Sauron, who covets it. 

‘Mithril! All folk desired it. It could be beaten like copper, 
and polished like glass; and the Dwarves could make of it a 
metal, light and yet harder than tempered steel. Its beauty 


414 THE FELLOWSHIP OF THE RING 


was like to that of common silver, but the beauty of muithril 
did not tarnish or grow dim. The Elves dearly loved it, and 
among many uses they made of it zthzldin, starmoon, which 
you saw upon the doors. Bilbo had a corslet of mithril-rings 
that Thorin gave him. I wonder what has become of it? 
Gathering dust still in Michel Delving Mathom-house, I 
suppose.’ 

‘What?’ cried Gimli, startled out of his silence. ‘A corslet 
of Moria-silver? That was a kingly gift!’ 

‘Yes,’ said Gandalf. ‘I never told him, but its worth was 
greater than the value of the whole Shire and everything in it.’ 

Frodo said nothing, but he put his hand under his tunic 
and touched the rings of his mail-shirt. He felt staggered to 
think that he had been walking about with the price of the 
Shire under his jacket. Had Bilbo known? He felt no doubt 
that Bilbo knew quite well. It was indeed a kingly gift. But 
now his thoughts had been carried away from the dark Mines, 
to Rivendell, to Bilbo, and to Bag End in the days while Bilbo 
was still there. He wished with all his heart that he was back 
there, and in those days, mowing the lawn, or pottering 
among the flowers, and that he had never heard of Moria, or 
mithril — or the Ring. 


A deep silence fell. One by one the others fell asleep. Frodo 
was on guard. As if it were a breath that came in through 
unseen doors out of deep places, dread came over him. His 
hands were cold and his brow damp. He listened. All his 
mind was given to listening and nothing else for two slow 
hours; but he heard no sound, not even the imagined echo 
of a footfall. 

His watch was nearly over, when, far off where he guessed 
that the western archway stood, he fancied that he could see 
two pale points of light, almost like luminous eyes. He started. 
His head had nodded. ‘I must have nearly fallen asleep on 
guard,’ he thought. ‘I was on the edge of a dream.’ He stood 
up and rubbed his eyes, and remained standing, peering into 
the dark, until he was relieved by Legolas. 


A JOURNEY IN THE DARK AIS 


When he lay down he quickly went to sleep, but it seemed 
to him that the dream went on: he heard whispers, and saw 
the two pale points of light approaching, slowly. He woke 
and found that the others were speaking softly near him, and 
that a dim light was falling on his face. High up above the 
eastern archway through a shaft near the roof came a long 
pale gleam; and across the hall through the northern arch 
light also glimmered faint and distantly. 

Frodo sat up. ‘Good morning!’ said Gandalf. ‘For morning 
it is again at last. I was right, you see. We are high up on the 
east side of Moria. Before today is over we ought to find 
the Great Gates and see the waters of Mirrormere lying in 
the Dimrill Dale before us.’ 

‘T shall be glad,’ said Gimli. ‘I have looked on Moria, and 
it is very great, but it has become dark and dreadful; and we 
have found no sign of my kindred. I doubt now that Balin 
ever came here.’ 


After they had breakfasted Gandalf decided to go on again 
at once. ‘We are tired, but we shall rest better when we are 
outside,’ he said. ‘I think that none of us will wish to spend 
another night in Moria.’ 

‘No indeed!’ said Boromir. ‘Which way shall we take? 
Yonder eastward arch?’ 

‘Maybe,’ said Gandalf. ‘But I do not know yet exactly 
where we are. Unless I am quite astray, I guess that we are 
above and to the north of the Great Gates; and it may not be 
easy to find the right road down to them. The eastern arch 
will probably prove to be the way that we must take; but 
before we make up our minds we ought to look about us. Let 
us go towards that light in the north door. If we could find a 
window it would help, but I fear that the light comes only 
down deep shafts.’ 

Following his lead the Company passed under the northern 
arch. They found themselves in a wide corridor. As they went 
along it the glimmer grew stronger, and they saw that it came 
through a doorway on their right. It was high and flat-topped, 


416 THE FELLOWSHIP OF THE RING 


and the stone door was still upon its hinges, standing half 
open. Beyond it was a large square chamber. It was dimly lit, 
but to their eyes, after so long a time in the dark, it seemed 
dazzlingly bright, and they blinked as they entered. 

Their feet disturbed a deep dust upon the floor, and 
stumbled among things lying in the doorway whose shapes 
they could not at first make out. The chamber was lit by a 
wide shaft high in the further eastern wall; it slanted upwards 
and, far above, a small square patch of blue sky could be 
seen. The light of the shaft fell directly on a table in the 
middle of the room: a single oblong block, about two feet 
high, upon which was laid a great slab of white stone. 

‘It looks like a tomb,’ muttered Frodo, and bent forwards 
with a curious sense of foreboding, to look more closely at it. 
Gandalf came quickly to his side. On the slab runes were 


RNAV 
ARKIN RA 


RARDRBNANEERBR 
RNENAYASQKIVAPRASBAN 


A JOURNEY IN THE DARK AI7 


“These are Daeron’s Runes, such as were used of old in 
Moria,’ said Gandalf. ‘Here is written in the tongues of Men 
and Dwarves: 


BALIN SON OF FUNDIN 
LORD OF MORIA.’ 


‘He is dead then,’ said Frodo. ‘I feared it was so.’ Gimli 
cast his hood over his face. 


Chapter 5 


THE BRIDGE OF KHAZAD-DUM 


The Company of the Ring stood silent beside the tomb of 
Balin. Frodo thought of Bilbo and his long friendship with 
the dwarf, and of Balin’s visit to the Shire long ago. In that 
dusty chamber in the mountains it seemed a thousand years 
ago and on the other side of the world. 

At length they stirred and looked up, and began to search 
for anything that would give them tidings of Balin’s fate, or 
show what had become of his folk. There was another smaller 
door on the other side of the chamber, under the shaft. By 
both the doors they could now see that many bones were 
lying, and among them were broken swords and axe-heads, 
and cloven shields and helms. Some of the swords were 
crooked: orc-scimitars with blackened blades. 

There were many recesses cut in the rock of the walls, and 
in them were large iron-bound chests of wood. All had 
been broken and plundered; but beside the shattered lid of 
one there lay the remains of a book. It had been slashed 
and stabbed and partly burned, and it was so stained with 
black and other dark marks like old blood that little of it 
could be read. Gandalf lifted it carefully, but the leaves 
cracked and broke as he laid it on the slab. He pored over 
it for some time without speaking. Frodo and Gimli stand- 
ing at his side could see, as he gingerly turned the leaves, 
that they were written by many different hands, in runes, 
both of Moria and of Dale, and here and there in Elvish 
script. 

At last Gandalf looked up. ‘It seems to be a record of the 
fortunes of Balin’s folk,’ he said. ‘I guess that it began with 
their coming to Dimrill Dale nigh on thirty years ago: the 
pages seem to have numbers referring to the years after their 


THE BRIDGE OF KHAZAD-DUM 419 


arrival. The top page is marked one — three, so at least two 
are missing from the beginning. Listen to this! 

‘We drove out orcs from the great gate and guard — I think; 
the next word is blurred and burned: probably room — we slew 
many in the bright — I think — sun in the dale. Fldt was killed by 
an arrow. He slew the great. Then there is a blur followed by 
Flot under grass near Mirror mere. The next line or two I 
cannot read. Then comes We have taken the twentyfirst hall 
of North end to dwell in. There is I cannot read what. A shaft 
is mentioned. Then Bakn has set up his seat in the Chamber of 
Mazarbul.’ 

“The Chamber of Records,’ said Gimli. ‘I guess that is 
where we now stand.’ 

‘Well, I can read no more for a long way,’ said Gandalf, 
‘except the word gold, and Durin’s Axe and something helm. 
Then Balin is now lord of Moria. That seems to end a chapter. 
After some stars another hand begins, and I can see we found 
truesilver, and later the word wellforged, and then something, 
Ihave it! mithril; and the last two lines Oin to seek for the upper 
armouries of Third Deep, something go westwards, a blur, to 
Hollin gate. 


Gandalf paused and set a few leaves aside. “There are 
several pages of the same sort, rather hastily written and 
much damaged,’ he said; ‘but I can make little of them in this 
light. Now there must be a number of leaves missing, because 
they begin to be numbered five, the fifth year of the colony, 
I suppose. Let me see! No, they are too cut and stained; I 
cannot read them. We might do better in the sunlight. Wait! 
Here is something: a large bold hand using an Elvish script.’ 

“That would be Ori’s hand,’ said Gimli, looking over the 
wizard’s arm. ‘He could write well and speedily, and often 
used the Elvish characters.’ 

‘I fear he had ill tidings to record in a fair hand,’ said 
Gandalf. “The first clear word is sorrow, but the rest of the 
line is lost, unless it ends in estre. Yes, it must be yestre 
followed by day being the tenth of novembre Balin lord of Moria 


420 THE FELLOWSHIP OF THE RING 


fell in Dimrill Dale. He went alone to look in Mirror mere. an 
orc shot him from behind a stone. we slew the orc, but many more 
... up from east up the Silverlode. The remainder of the page 
is so blurred that I can hardly make anything out, but I think 
I can read we have barred the gates, and then can hold them 
long tf, and then perhaps horrible and suffer. Poor Balin! He 
seems to have kept the title that he took for less than five 
years. I wonder what happened afterwards; but there is no 
time to puzzle out the last few pages. Here is the last page of 
all.” He paused and sighed. 

‘Tt is grim reading,’ he said. ‘I fear their end was cruel. 
Listen! We cannot get out. We cannot get out. They have taken 
the Bridge and second hall. Frar and Loni and Nali fell there. 
Then there are four lines smeared so that I can only read 
went 5 days ago. The last lines run the pool ts up to the wall 
at Westgate. The Watcher in the Water took Oin. We cannot 
get out. The end comes, and then drums, drums in the deep. I 
wonder what that means. The last thing written is in a trailing 
scrawl of elf-letters: they are coming. There is nothing more.’ 
Gandalf paused and stood in silent thought. 

A sudden dread and a horror of the chamber fell on the 
Company. ‘We cannot get out,’ muttered Gimli. ‘It was well 
for us that the pool had sunk a little, and that the Watcher 
was sleeping down at the southern end.’ 

Gandalf raised his head and looked round. “They seem to 
have made a last stand by both doors,’ he said; ‘but there 
were not many left by that time. So ended the attempt to 
retake Moria! It was valiant but foolish. The time is not come 
yet. Now, I fear, we must say farewell to Balin son of Fundin. 
Here he must lie in the halls of his fathers. We will take this 
book, the Book of Mazarbul, and look at it more closely later. 
You had better keep it, Gimli, and take it back to Dain, if 
you get a chance. It will interest him, though it will grieve 
him deeply. Come, let us go! The morning is passing.’ 

‘Which way shall we go?’ asked Boromir. 

‘Back to the hall,’ answered Gandalf. ‘But our visit to this 
room has not been in vain. I now know where we are. This 


THE BRIDGE OF KHAZAD-DUM A421 


must be, as Gimli says, the Chamber of Mazarbul; and the 
hall must be the twenty-first of the North-end. Therefore we 
should leave by the eastern arch of the hall, and bear right 
and south, and go downwards. The Twenty-first Hall should 
be on the Seventh Level, that is six above the level of the 
Gates. Come now! Back to the hall!’ 


Gandalf had hardly spoken these words, when there came 
a great noise: a rolling Boom that seemed to come from depths 
far below, and to tremble in the stone at their feet. They 
sprang towards the door in alarm. Doom, doom it rolled again, 
as if huge hands were turning the very caverns of Moria into a 
vast drum. Then there came an echoing blast: a great horn was 
blown in the hall, and answering horns and harsh cries were 
heard further off. There was a hurrying sound of many feet. 

“They are coming!’ cried Legolas. 

‘We cannot get out,’ said Gimli. 

‘Trapped!’ cried Gandalf. “Why did I delay? Here we are, 
caught, just as they were before. But I was not here then. We 
will see what ? 

Doom, doom came the drum-beat and the walls shook. 

‘Slam the doors and wedge them!’ shouted Aragorn. ‘And 
keep your packs on as long as you can: we may get a chance 
to cut our way out yet.’ 

‘No!’ said Gandalf. ‘We must not get shut in. Keep the 
east door ajar! We will go that way, if we get a chance.’ 

Another harsh horn-call and shrill cries rang out. Feet were 
coming down the corridor. There was a ring and clatter as 
the Company drew their swords. Glamdring shone with a 
pale light, and Sting glinted at the edges. Boromir set his 
shoulder against the western door. 

‘Wait a moment! Do not close it yet!’ said Gandalf. He 
sprang forward to Boromir’s side and drew himself up to his 
full height. 

‘Who comes hither to disturb the rest of Balin Lord of 
Moria?’ he cried in a loud voice. 

There was a rush of hoarse laughter, like the fall of sliding 


422 THE FELLOWSHIP OF THE RING 


stones into a pit; amid the clamour a deep voice was raised 
in command. Doom, boom, doom went the drums in the deep. 

With a quick movement Gandalf stepped before the nar- 
row opening of the door and thrust forward his staff. There 
was a dazzling flash that lit the chamber and the passage 
outside. For an instant the wizard looked out. Arrows whined 
and whistled down the corridor as he sprang back. 

“There are Orcs, very many of them,’ he said. ‘And some 
are large and evil: black Uruks of Mordor. For the moment 
they are hanging back, but there is something else there. A 
great cave-troll, I think, or more than one. There is no hope 
of escape that way.’ 

‘And no hope at all, if they come at the other door as well,’ 
said Boromir. 

“There is no sound outside here yet,’ said Aragorn, who 
was standing by the eastern door listening. “The passage on 
this side plunges straight down a stair: it plainly does not lead 
back towards the hall. But it is no good flying blindly this 
way with the pursuit just behind. We cannot block the door. 
Its key is gone and the lock is broken, and it opens inwards. 
We must do something to delay the enemy first. We will 
make them fear the Chamber of Mazarbul!’ he said grimly, 
feeling the edge of his sword, Anduril. 


Heavy feet were heard in the corridor. Boromir flung him- 
self against the door and heaved it to; then he wedged it with 
broken sword-blades and splinters of wood. The Company 
retreated to the other side of the chamber. But they had no 
chance to fly yet. There was a blow on the door that made it 
quiver; and then it began to grind slowly open, driving back 
the wedges. A huge arm and shoulder, with a dark skin of 
greenish scales, was thrust through the widening gap. Then 
a great, flat, toeless foot was forced through below. There 
was a dead silence outside. 

Boromir leaped forward and hewed at the arm with all his 
might; but his sword rang, glanced aside, and fell from his 
shaken hand. The blade was notched. 


THE BRIDGE OF KHAZAD-DUM 423 


Suddenly, and to his own surprise, Frodo felt a hot wrath 
blaze up in his heart. “The Shire!’ he cried, and springing 
beside Boromir, he stooped, and stabbed with Sting at the 
hideous foot. There was a bellow, and the foot jerked back, 
nearly wrenching Sting from Frodo’s arm. Black drops 
dripped from the blade and smoked on the floor. Boromir 
hurled himself against the door and slammed it again. 

‘One for the Shire!’ cried Aragorn. “The hobbit’s bite is 
deep! You have a good blade, Frodo son of Drogo!’ 

There was a crash on the door, followed by crash after 
crash. Rams and hammers were beating against it. It cracked 
and staggered back, and the opening grew suddenly wide. 
Arrows came whistling in, but struck the northern wall, and 
fell harmlessly to the floor. There was a horn-blast and a rush 
of feet, and orcs one after another leaped into the chamber. 

How many there were the Company could not count. The 
affray was sharp, but the orcs were dismayed by the fierceness 
of the defence. Legolas shot two through the throat. Gimli 
hewed the legs from under another that had sprung up on 
Balin’s tomb. Boromir and Aragorn slew many. When thir- 
teen had fallen the rest fled shrieking, leaving the defenders 
unharmed, except for Sam who had a scratch along the scalp. 
A quick duck had saved him; and he had felled his orc: a 
sturdy thrust with his Barrow-blade. A fire was smouldering 
in his brown eyes that would have made Ted Sandyman step 
backwards, if he had seen it. 

‘Now is the time!’ cried Gandalf. ‘Let us go, before the 
troll returns!’ 

But even as they retreated, and before Pippin and Merry 
had reached the stair outside, a huge orc-chieftain, almost 
man-high, clad in black mail from head to foot, leaped into 
the chamber; behind him his followers clustered in the door- 
way. His broad flat face was swart, his eyes were like coals, 
and his tongue was red; he wielded a great spear. With a 
thrust of his huge hide shield he turned Boromir’s sword and 
bore him backwards, throwing him to the ground. Diving 
under Aragorn’s blow with the speed of a striking snake he 


424 THE FELLOWSHIP OF THE RING 


charged into the Company and thrust with his spear straight 
at Frodo. The blow caught him on the right side, and Frodo 
was hurled against the wall and pinned. Sam, with a cry, 
hacked at the spear-shaft, and it broke. But even as the orc 
flung down the truncheon and swept out his scimitar, Anduril 
came down upon his helm. There was a flash like flame and 
the helm burst asunder. The orc fell with cloven head. His 
followers fled howling, as Boromir and Aragorn sprang at 
them. 

Doom, doom went the drums in the deep. The great voice 
rolled out again. 

‘Now!’ shouted Gandalf. ‘Now is the last chance. Run 
for it!’ 


Aragorn picked up Frodo where he lay by the wall and 
made for the stair, pushing Merry and Pippin in front of him. 
The others followed; but Gimli had to be dragged away by 
Legolas: in spite of the peril he lingered by Balin’s tomb with 
his head bowed. Boromir hauled the eastern door to, grinding 
upon its hinges: it had great iron rings on either side, but 
could not be fastened. 

‘T am all right,’ gasped Frodo. ‘I can walk. Put me down!’ 

Aragorn nearly dropped him in his amazement. ‘I thought 
you were dead!’ he cried. 

‘Not yet!’ said Gandalf. ‘But there is no time for wonder. 
Off you go, all of you, down the stairs! Wait a few minutes 
for me at the bottom, but if I do not come soon, go on! Go 
quickly and choose paths leading right and downwards.’ 

‘We cannot leave you to hold the door alone!’ said Aragorn. 

‘Do as I say!’ said Gandalf fiercely. ‘Swords are no more 
use here. Go!’ 


The passage was lit by no shaft and was utterly dark. They 
groped their way down a long flight of steps, and then looked 
back; but they could see nothing, except high above them the 
faint glimmer of the wizard’s staff. He seemed to be still 
standing on guard by the closed door. Frodo breathed heavily 


THE BRIDGE OF KHAZAD-DUM 425 


and leaned against Sam, who put his arms about him. They 
stood peering up the stairs into the darkness. Frodo thought 
he could hear the voice of Gandalf above, muttering words 
that ran down the sloping roof with a sighing echo. He could 
not catch what was said. The walls seemed to be trembling. 
Every now and again the drum-beats throbbed and rolled: 
doom, doom. 

Suddenly at the top of the stair there was a stab of white 
light. Then there was a dull rumble and a heavy thud. The 
drum-beats broke out wildly: doom-boom, doom-boom, and 
then stopped. Gandalf came flying down the steps and fell to 
the ground in the midst of the Company. 

‘Well, well! That’s over!’ said the wizard struggling to his 
feet. ‘I have done all that I could. But I have met my match, 
and have nearly been destroyed. But don’t stand here! Go 
on! You will have to do without light for a while: I am rather 
shaken. Go on! Go on! Where are you, Gimli? Come ahead 
with me! Keep close behind, all of you!’ 


They stumbled after him wondering what had happened. 
Doom, doom went the drum-beats again: they now sounded 
muffled and far away, but they were following. There was no 
other sound of pursuit, neither tramp of feet, nor any voice. 
Gandalf took no turns, right or left, for the passage seemed 
to be going in the direction that he desired. Every now and 
again it descended a flight of steps, fifty or more, to a lower 
level. At the moment that was their chief danger; for in the 
dark they could not see a descent, until they came on it and 
put their feet out into emptiness. Gandalf felt the ground 
with his staff like a blind man. 

At the end of an hour they had gone a mile, or maybe a 
little more, and had descended many flights of stairs. There 
was still no sound of pursuit. Almost they began to hope 
that they would escape. At the bottom of the seventh flight 
Gandalf halted. 

‘Tt is getting hot!’ he gasped. ‘We ought to be down at least 
to the level of the Gates now. Soon I think we should look 


426 THE FELLOWSHIP OF THE RING 


for a left-hand turn to take us east. I hope it is not far. I am 
very weary. I must rest here a moment, even if all the orcs 
ever spawned are after us.’ 

Gimli took his arm and helped him down to a seat on the 
step. ‘What happened away up there at the door?’ he asked. 
‘Did you meet the beater of the drums?’ 

‘I do not know,’ answered Gandalf. ‘But I found myself 
suddenly faced by something that I have not met before. I 
could think of nothing to do but to try and put a shutting-spell 
on the door. I know many; but to do things of that kind 
rightly requires time, and even then the door can be broken 
by strength. 

‘As I stood there I could hear orc-voices on the other side: 
at any moment I thought they would burst it open. I could 
not hear what was said; they seemed to be talking in their 
own hideous language. All I caught was ghdsh: that is “‘fire’’. 
Then something came into the chamber -— I felt it through 
the door, and the orcs themselves were afraid and fell silent. 
It laid hold of the iron ring, and then it perceived me and my 
spell. 

‘What it was I cannot guess, but I have never felt such a 
challenge. The counter-spell was terrible. It nearly broke me. 
For an instant the door left my control and began to open! I 
had to speak a word of Command. That proved too great a 
strain. The door burst in pieces. Something dark as a cloud 
was blocking out all the light inside, and I was thrown back- 
wards down the stairs. All the wall gave way, and the roof of 
the chamber as well, I think. 

‘I am afraid Balin is buried deep, and maybe something 
else is buried there too. I cannot say. But at least the passage 
behind us was completely blocked. Ah! I have never felt so 
spent, but it is passing. And now what about you, Frodo? 
There was not time to say so, but I have never been more 
delighted in my life than when you spoke. I feared that it was 
a brave but dead hobbit that Aragorn was carrying.’ 

‘What about me?’ said Frodo. ‘I am alive, and whole I 
think. I am bruised and in pain, but it is not too bad.’ 


THE BRIDGE OF KHAZAD-DUM 427 


‘Well,’ said Aragorn, ‘I can only say that hobbits are made 
of a stuff so tough that I have never met the like of it. Had I 
known, I would have spoken softer in the Inn at Bree! That 
spear-thrust would have skewered a wild boar!’ 

‘Well, it did not skewer me, I am glad to say,’ said Frodo; 
‘though I feel as if I had been caught between a hammer and 
an anvil.’ He said no more. He found breathing painful. 

“You take after Bilbo,’ said Gandalf. “There is more about 
you than meets the eye, as I said of him long ago.’ Frodo 
wondered if the remark meant more than it said. 


They now went on again. Before long Gimli spoke. He 
had keen eyes in the dark. ‘I think,’ he said, ‘that there is a 
light ahead. But it is not daylight. It is red. What can it be?’ 

‘Ghash? muttered Gandalf. ‘I wonder if that is what they 
meant: that the lower levels are on fire? Still, we can only 
go on.’ 

Soon the light became unmistakable, and could be seen by 
all. It was flickering and glowing on the walls away down the 
passage before them. They could now see their way: in front 
the road sloped down swiftly, and some way ahead there 
stood a low archway; through it the growing light came. The 
air became very hot. 

When they came to the arch Gandalf went through, signing 
to them to wait. As he stood just beyond the opening they 
saw his face lit by a red glow. Quickly he stepped back. 

“There is some new devilry here,’ he said, ‘devised for our 
welcome, no doubt. But I know now where we are: we have 
reached the First Deep, the level immediately below the 
Gates. This is the Second Hall of Old Moria; and the Gates 
are near: away beyond the eastern end, on the left, not more 
than a quarter of a mile. Across the Bridge, up a broad stair, 
along a wide road, through the First Hall, and out! But come 
and look!’ 

They peered out. Before them was another cavernous hall. 
It was loftier and far longer than the one in which they had 
slept. They were near its eastern end; westward it ran away 


428 THE FELLOWSHIP OF THE RING 


into darkness. Down the centre stalked a double line of tower- 
ing pillars. They were carved like boles of mighty trees whose 
boughs upheld the roof with a branching tracery of stone. 
Their stems were smooth and black, but a red glow was 
darkly mirrored in their sides. Right across the floor, close to 
the feet of two huge pillars a great fissure had opened. Out 
of it a fierce red light came, and now and again flames licked 
at the brink and curled about the bases of the columns. Wisps 
of dark smoke wavered in the hot air. 

‘If we had come by the main road down from the upper 
halls, we should have been trapped here,’ said Gandalf. ‘Let 
us hope that the fire now lies between us and pursuit. Come! 
There is no time to lose.’ 

Even as he spoke they heard again the pursuing drum-beat: 
Doom, doom, doom. Away beyond the shadows at the western 
end of the hall there came cries and horn-calls. Doom, doom: 
the pillars seemed to tremble and the flames to quiver. 

‘Now for the last race!’ said Gandalf. ‘If the sun is shining 
outside, we may still escape. After me!’ 

He turned left and sped across the smooth floor of the hall. 
The distance was greater than it had looked. As they ran they 
heard the beat and echo of many hurrying feet behind. A 
shrill yell went up: they had been seen. There was a ring and 
clash of steel. An arrow whistled over Frodo’s head. 

Boromir laughed. “They did not expect this,’ he said. “The 
fire has cut them off. We are on the wrong side!’ 

‘Look ahead!’ called Gandalf. “The Bridge is near. It is 
dangerous and narrow.’ 

Suddenly Frodo saw before him a black chasm. At the end 
of the hall the floor vanished and fell to an unknown depth. 
The outer door could only be reached by a slender bridge of 
stone, without kerb or rail, that spanned the chasm with one 
curving spring of fifty feet. It was an ancient defence of the 
Dwarves against any enemy that might capture the First Hall 
and the outer passages. They could only pass across it in 
single file. At the brink Gandalf halted and the others came 
up in a pack behind. 


THE BRIDGE OF KHAZAD-DUM A429 


‘Lead the way, Gimli!’ he said. ‘Pippin and Merry next. 
Straight on, and up the stair beyond the door!’ 

Arrows fell among them. One struck Frodo and sprang 
back. Another pierced Gandalf’s hat and stuck there like a 
black feather. Frodo looked behind. Beyond the fire he saw 
swarming black figures: there seemed to be hundreds of orcs. 
They brandished spears and scimitars which shone red as 
blood in the firelight. Doom, doom rolled the drum-beats, 
growing louder and louder, doom, doom. 

Legolas turned and set an arrow to the string, though it 
was a long shot for his small bow. He drew, but his hand fell, 
and the arrow slipped to the ground. He gave a cry of dismay 
and fear. Two great trolls appeared; they bore great slabs of 
stone, and flung them down to serve as gangways over the 
fire. But it was not the trolls that had filled the Elf with terror. 
The ranks of the orcs had opened, and they crowded away, 
as if they themselves were afraid. Something was coming up 
behind them. What it was could not be seen: it was like a 
great shadow, in the middle of which was a dark form, of 
man-shape maybe, yet greater; and a power and terror 
seemed to be in it and to go before it. 

It came to the edge of the fire and the light faded as if a 
cloud had bent over it. Then with a rush it leaped across the 
fissure. The flames roared up to greet it, and wreathed about 
it; and a black smoke swirled in the air. Its streaming mane 
kindled, and blazed behind it. In its right hand was a blade 
like a stabbing tongue of fire; in its left it held a whip of many 
thongs. 

‘Ai! ai!’ wailed Legolas. ‘A Balrog! A Balrog is come!’ 

Gimli stared with wide eyes. ‘Durin’s Bane!’ he cried, and 
letting his axe fall he covered his face. 

‘A Balrog,’ muttered Gandalf. ‘Now I understand.’ He 
faltered and leaned heavily on his staff. ‘What an evil fortune! 
And IJ am already weary.’ 


The dark figure streaming with fire raced towards them. 
The orcs yelled and poured over the stone gangways. Then 


430 THE FELLOWSHIP OF THE RING 


Boromir raised his horn and blew. Loud the challenge rang 
and bellowed, like the shout of many throats under the 
cavernous roof. For a moment the orcs quailed and the fiery 
shadow halted. Then the echoes died as suddenly as a flame 
blown out by a dark wind, and the enemy advanced again. 

‘Over the bridge!’ cried Gandalf, recalling his strength. 
‘Fly! This is a foe beyond any of you. I must hold the narrow 
way. Fly!’ Aragorn and Boromir did not heed the command, 
but still held their ground, side by side, behind Gandalf at 
the far end of the bridge. The others halted just within the 
doorway at the hall’s end, and turned, unable to leave their 
leader to face the enemy alone. 

The Balrog reached the bridge. Gandalf stood in the 
middle of the span, leaning on the staff in his left hand, but 
in his other hand Glamdring gleamed, cold and white. His 
enemy halted again, facing him, and the shadow about it 
reached out like two vast wings. It raised the whip, and the 
thongs whined and cracked. Fire came from its nostrils. But 
Gandalf stood firm. 

“You cannot pass,’ he said. The orcs stood still, and a dead 
silence fell. ‘I am a servant of the Secret Fire, wielder of the 
flame of Anor. You cannot pass. The dark fire will not avail 
you, flame of Udtin. Go back to the Shadow! You cannot 
pass.’ 

The Balrog made no answer. The fire in it seemed to die, 
but the darkness grew. It stepped forward slowly on to the 
bridge, and suddenly it drew itself up to a great height, and 
its wings were spread from wall to wall; but still Gandalf 
could be seen, glimmering in the gloom; he seemed small, 
and altogether alone: grey and bent, like a wizened tree before 
the onset of a storm. 

From out of the shadow a red sword leaped flaming. 

Glamdring glittered white in answer. 

There was a ringing clash and a stab of white fire. The 
Balrog fell back, and its sword flew up in molten fragments. 
The wizard swayed on the bridge, stepped back a pace, and 
then again stood still. 


THE BRIDGE OF KHAZAD-DUM 431 


“You cannot pass!’ he said. 

With a bound the Balrog leaped full upon the bridge. Its 
whip whirled and hissed. 

‘He cannot stand alone!’ cried Aragorn suddenly and ran 
back along the bridge. ‘Elendil!’ he shouted. ‘I am with you, 
Gandalf!’ 

‘Gondor!’ cried Boromir and leaped after him. 

At that moment Gandalf lifted his staff, and crying aloud 
he smote the bridge before him. The staff broke asunder and 
fell from his hand. A blinding sheet of white flame sprang 
up. The bridge cracked. Right at the Balrog’s feet it broke, 
and the stone upon which it stood crashed into the gulf, while 
the rest remained, poised, quivering like a tongue of rock 
thrust out into emptiness. 

With a terrible cry the Balrog fell forward, and its shadow 
plunged down and vanished. But even as it fell it swung its 
whip, and the thongs lashed and curled about the wizard’s 
knees, dragging him to the brink. He staggered and fell, 
grasped vainly at the stone, and slid into the abyss. ‘Fly, you 
fools!’ he cried, and was gone. 


The fires went out, and blank darkness fell. The Company 
stood rooted with horror staring into the pit. Even as Aragorn 
and Boromir came flying back, the rest of the bridge cracked 
and fell. With a cry Aragorn roused them. 

‘Come! I will lead you now!’ he called. ‘We must obey his 
last command. Follow me!’ 

They stumbled wildly up the great stairs beyond the door, 
Aragorn leading, Boromir at the rear. At the top was a wide 
echoing passage. Along this they fled. Frodo heard Sam at 
his side weeping, and then he found that he himself was 
weeping as he ran. Doom, doom, doom the drum-beats rolled 
behind, mournful now and slow; doom! 

They ran on. The light grew before them; great shafts 
pierced the roof. They ran swifter. They passed into a hall, 
bright with daylight from its high windows in the east. They 
fled across it. Through its huge broken doors they passed, 


432 THE FELLOWSHIP OF THE RING 


and suddenly before them the Great Gates opened, an arch 
of blazing light. 

There was a guard of orcs crouching in the shadows behind 
the great door-posts towering on either side, but the gates 
were shattered and cast down. Aragorn smote to the ground 
the captain that stood in his path, and the rest fled in terror 
of his wrath. The Company swept past them and took no 
heed of them. Out of the Gates they ran and sprang down 
the huge and age-worn steps, the threshold of Moria. 

Thus, at last, they came beyond hope under the sky and 
felt the wind on their faces. 

They did not halt until they were out of bowshot from the 
walls. Dimrill Dale lay about them. The shadow of the Misty 
Mountains lay upon it, but eastwards there was a golden light 
on the land. It was but one hour after noon. The sun was 
shining; the clouds were white and high. 

They looked back. Dark yawned the archway of the Gates 
under the mountain-shadow. Faint and far beneath the earth 
rolled the slow drum-beats: doom. A thin black smoke trailed 
out. Nothing else was to be seen; the dale all around was 
empty. Doom. Grief at last wholly overcame them, and they 
wept long: some standing and silent, some cast upon the 
ground. Doom, doom. The drum-beats faded. 


Chapter 6 


LOTHLORIEN 


‘Alas! I fear we cannot stay here longer,’ said Aragorn. He 
looked towards the mountains and held up his sword. ‘Fare- 
well, Gandalf!’ he cried. ‘Did I not say to you: 7f you pass the 
doors of Moria, beware? Alas that I spoke true! What hope 
have we without you?’ 

He turned to the Company. ‘We must do without hope,’ 
he said. ‘At least we may yet be avenged. Let us gird ourselves 
and weep no more! Come! We have a long road, and much 
to do.’ 

They rose and looked about them. Northward the dale ran 
up into a glen of shadows between two great arms of the 
mountains, above which three white peaks were shining: 
Celebdil, Fanuidhol, Caradhras, the Mountains of Moria. At 
the head of the glen a torrent flowed like a white lace over 
an endless ladder of short falls, and a mist of foam hung in 
the air about the mountains’ feet. 

“Yonder is the Dimrill Stair,’ said Aragorn, pointing to the 
falls. ‘Down the deep-cloven way that climbs beside the 
torrent we should have come, if fortune had been kinder.’ 

‘Or Caradhras less cruel,’ said Gimli. “There he stands 
smiling in the sun!’ He shook his fist at the furthest of the 
snow-capped peaks and turned away. 

To the east the outflung arm of the mountains marched to 
a sudden end, and far lands could be descried beyond them, 
wide and vague. To the south the Misty Mountains receded 
endlessly as far as sight could reach. Less than a mile away, 
and a little below them, for they still stood high up on the 
west side of the dale, there lay a mere. It was long and oval, 
shaped like a great spear-head thrust deep into the northern 
glen; but its southern end was beyond the shadows under the 


434 THE FELLOWSHIP OF THE RING 


sunlit sky. Yet its waters were dark: a deep blue like clear 
evening sky seen from a lamp-lit room. Its face was still and 
unruffled. About it lay a smooth sward, shelving down on all 
sides to its bare unbroken rim. 

“There lies the Mirrormere, deep Kheled-zdram!’ said 
Gimli sadly. ‘I remember that he said: ““May you have joy of 
the sight! But we cannot linger there.’’ Now long shall I 
journey ere I have joy again. It is I that must hasten away, 
and he that must remain.’ 


The Company now went down the road from the Gates. 
It was rough and broken, fading to a winding track between 
heather and whin that thrust amid the cracking stones. But 
still it could be seen that once long ago a great paved way had 
wound upwards from the lowlands to the Dwarf-kingdom. In 
places there were ruined works of stone beside the path, and 
mounds of green topped with slender birches, or fir-trees 
sighing in the wind. An eastward bend led them hard by the 
sward of Mirrormere, and there not far from the roadside 
stood a single column broken at the top. 

“That is Durin’s Stone!’ cried Gimli. ‘I cannot pass without 
turning aside for a moment to look at the wonder of the dale!’ 

‘Be swift then!’ said Aragorn, looking back towards the 
Gates. “The Sun sinks early. The Orcs will not, maybe, come 
out till after dusk, but we must be far away before nightfall. 
The Moon is almost spent, and it will be dark tonight.’ 

‘Come with me, Frodo!’ cried the dwarf, springing from 
the road. ‘I would not have you go without seeing Kheled- 
zaram.’ He ran down the long green slope. Frodo followed 
slowly, drawn by the still blue water in spite of hurt and 
weariness; Sam came up behind. 

Beside the standing stone Gimli halted and looked up. It 
was cracked and weather-worn, and the faint runes upon its 
side could not be read. “This pillar marks the spot where 
Durin first looked in the Mirrormere,’ said the dwarf. ‘Let us 
look ourselves once, ere we go!’ 

They stooped over the dark water. At first they could see 


LOTHLORIEN 435 


nothing. Then slowly they saw the forms of the encircling 
mountains mirrored in a profound blue, and the peaks were 
like plumes of white flame above them; beyond there was a 
space of sky. There like jewels sunk in the deep shone glinting 
stars, though sunlight was in the sky above. Of their own 
stooping forms no shadow could be seen. 

‘O Kheled-zéram fair and wonderful!’ said Gimli. “There 
lies the Crown of Durin till he wakes. Farewell!’ He bowed, 
and turned away, and hastened back up the greensward to 
the road again. 

‘What did you see?’ said Pippin to Sam, but Sam was too 
deep in thought to answer. 


The road now turned south and went quickly downwards, 
running out from between the arms of the dale. Some way 
below the mere they came on a deep well of water, clear as 
crystal, from which a freshet fell over a stone lip and ran 
glistening and gurgling down a steep rocky channel. 

‘Here is the spring from which the Silverlode rises,’ said 
Gimli. ‘Do not drink of it! It is icy cold.’ 

‘Soon it becomes a swift river, and it gathers water from 
many other mountain-streams,’ said Aragorn. ‘Our road 
leads beside it for many miles. For I shall take you by the 
road that Gandalf chose, and first I hope to come to the 
woods where the Silverlode flows into the Great River — out 
yonder.’ They looked as he pointed, and before them they 
could see the stream leaping down to the trough of the valley, 
and then running on and away into the lower lands, until it 
was lost in a golden haze. 

“There lie the woods of Lothlorien!’ said Legolas. “That is 
the fairest of all the dwellings of my people. There are no 
trees like the trees of that land. For in the autumn their leaves 
fall not, but turn to gold. Not till the spring comes and the 
new green opens do they fall, and then the boughs are laden 
with yellow flowers; and the floor of the wood is golden, and 
golden is the roof, and its pillars are of silver, for the bark of 
the trees is smooth and grey. So still our songs in Mirkwood 


436 THE FELLOWSHIP OF THE RING 


say. My heart would be glad if I were beneath the eaves of 
that wood, and it were springtime!’ 

‘My heart will be glad, even in the winter,’ said Aragorn. 
‘But it lies many miles away. Let us hasten!’ 


For some time Frodo and Sam managed to keep up with 
the others; but Aragorn was leading them at a great pace, 
and after a while they lagged behind. They had eaten nothing 
since the early morning. Sam’s cut was burning like fire, and 
his head felt light. In spite of the shining sun the wind seemed 
chill after the warm darkness of Moria. He shivered. Frodo 
felt every step more painful and he gasped for breath. 

At last Legolas turned, and seeing them now far behind, 
he spoke to Aragorn. The others halted, and Aragorn ran 
back, calling to Boromir to come with him. 

‘Iam sorry, Frodo!’ he cried, full of concern. ‘So much has 
happened this day and we have such need of haste, that I 
have forgotten that you were hurt; and Sam too. You should 
have spoken. We have done nothing to ease you, as we ought, 
though all the orcs of Moria were after us. Come now! A 
little further on there is a place where we can rest for a little. 
There I will do what I can for you. Come, Boromir! We will 
carry them.’ 

Soon afterwards they came upon another stream that ran 
down from the west, and joined its bubbling water with 
the hurrying Silverlode. Together they plunged over a fall 
of green-hued stone, and foamed down into a dell. About 
it stood fir-trees, short and bent, and its sides were steep 
and clothed with harts-tongue and shrubs of whortle-berry. 
At the bottom there was a level space through which the 
stream flowed noisily over shining pebbles. Here they rested. 
It was now nearly three hours after noon, and they had come 
only a few miles from the Gates. Already the sun was 
westering. 

While Gimli and the two younger hobbits kindled a fire of 
brush- and fir-wood, and drew water, Aragorn tended Sam 
and Frodo. Sam’s wound was not deep, but it looked ugly, 


LOTHLORIEN 437 


and Aragorn’s face was grave as he examined it. After a 
moment he looked up with relief. 

‘Good luck, Sam!’ he said. ‘Many have received worse than 
this in payment for the slaying of their first orc. The cut is 
not poisoned, as the wounds of orc-blades too often are. It 
should heal well when I have tended it. Bathe it when Gimli 
has heated water.’ 

He opened his pouch and drew out some withered leaves. 
“They are dry, and some of their virtue has gone,’ he said, 
‘but here I have still some of the leaves of athelas that I 
gathered near Weathertop. Crush one in the water, and wash 
the wound clean, and I will bind it. Now it is your turn, 
Frodo!’ 

‘T am all right,’ said Frodo, reluctant to have his garments 
touched. ‘All I needed was some food and a little rest.’ 

‘No!’ said Aragorn. ‘We must have a look and see what 
the hammer and the anvil have done to you. I still marvel 
that you are alive at all.’ Gently he stripped off Frodo’s 
old jacket and worn tunic, and gave a gasp of wonder. 
Then he laughed. The silver corslet shimmered before his 
eyes like the light upon a rippling sea. Carefully he took it 
off and held it up, and the gems on it glittered like stars, and 
the sound of the shaken rings was like the tinkle of rain in a 
pool. 

‘Look, my friends!’ he called. “‘Here’s a pretty hobbit-skin 
to wrap an elven-princeling in! If it were known that hobbits 
had such hides, all the hunters of Middle-earth would be 
riding to the Shire.’ 

‘And all the arrows of all the hunters in the world would 
be in vain,’ said Gimli, gazing at the mail in wonder. ‘It is a 
mithril-coat. Mithril! I have never seen or heard tell of one 
so fair. Is this the coat that Gandalf spoke of? Then he 
undervalued it. But it was well given!’ 

‘T have often wondered what you and Bilbo were doing, so 
close in his little room,’ said Merry. “Bless the old hobbit! I 
love him more than ever. I hope we get a chance of telling 
him about it!’ 


438 THE FELLOWSHIP OF THE RING 


There was a dark and blackened bruise on Frodo’s right 
side and breast. Under the mail there was a shirt of soft 
leather, but at one point the rings had been driven through it 
into the flesh. Frodo’s left side also was scored and bruised 
where he had been hurled against the wall. While the others 
set the food ready, Aragorn bathed the hurts with water in 
which athelas was steeped. The pungent fragrance filled the 
dell, and all those who stooped over the steaming water felt 
refreshed and strengthened. Soon Frodo felt the pain leave 
him, and his breath grew easy: though he was stiff and sore 
to the touch for many days. Aragorn bound some soft pads 
of cloth at his side. 

“The mail is marvellously light,’ he said. ‘Put it on again, 
if you can bear it. My heart is glad to know that you have 
such a coat. Do not lay it aside, even in sleep, unless fortune 
brings you where you are safe for a while; and that will seldom 
chance while your quest lasts.’ 


When they had eaten, the Company got ready to go on. 
They put out the fire and hid all traces of it. Then climbing 
out of the dell they took to the road again. They had not gone 
far before the sun sank behind the westward heights and great 
shadows crept down the mountain-sides. Dusk veiled their 
feet, and mist rose in the hollows. Away in the east the 
evening light lay pale upon the dim lands of distant plain 
and wood. Sam and Frodo now feeling eased and greatly 
refreshed were able to go at a fair pace, and with only one 
brief halt Aragorn led the Company on for nearly three more 
hours. 

It was dark. Deep night had fallen. There were many clear 
stars, but the fast-waning moon would not be seen till late. 
Gimli and Frodo were at the rear, walking softly and not 
speaking, listening for any sound upon the road behind. At 
length Gimli broke the silence. 

‘Not a sound but the wind,’ he said. “There are no goblins 
near, or my ears are made of wood. It is to be hoped that the 
Orcs will be content with driving us from Moria. And maybe 


LOTHLORIEN 439 


that was all their purpose, and they had nothing else to do 
with us — with the Ring. Though Orcs will often pursue foes 
for many leagues into the plain, if they have a fallen captain 
to avenge.’ 

Frodo did not answer. He looked at Sting, and the blade 
was dull. Yet he had heard something, or thought he had. As 
soon as the shadows had fallen about them and the road 
behind was dim, he had heard again the quick patter of feet. 
Even now he heard it. He turned swiftly. There were two 
tiny gleams of light behind, or for a moment he thought he 
saw them, but at once they slipped aside and vanished. 

‘What is it?’ said the dwarf. 

‘I don’t know,’ answered Frodo. ‘I thought I heard feet, 
and I thought I saw a light — like eyes. I have thought so 
often, since we first entered Moria.’ 

Gimli halted and stooped to the ground. ‘I hear nothing 
but the night-speech of plant and stone,’ he said. ‘Come! Let 
us hurry! The others are out of sight.’ 


The night-wind blew chill up the valley to meet them. 
Before them a wide grey shadow loomed, and they heard an 
endless rustle of leaves like poplars in the breeze. 

‘Lothlorien!’ cried Legolas. ‘Lothlérien! We have come to 
the eaves of the Golden Wood. Alas that it is winter!’ 

Under the night the trees stood tall before them, arched 
over the road and stream that ran suddenly beneath their 
spreading boughs. In the dim light of the stars their stems 
were grey, and their quivering leaves a hint of fallow gold. 

‘Lothlorien!’ said Aragorn. ‘Glad I am to hear again the 
wind in the trees! We are still little more than five leagues 
from the Gates, but we can go no further. Here let us hope 
that the virtue of the Elves will keep us tonight from the peril 
that comes behind.’ 

‘If Elves indeed still dwell here in the darkening world,’ 
said Gimli. 

‘It is long since any of my own folk journeyed hither 
back to the land whence we wandered in ages long ago,’ 


440 THE FELLOWSHIP OF THE RING 


said Legolas, ‘but we hear that Lorien is not yet deserted, 
for there is a secret power here that holds evil from the 
land. Nevertheless its folk are seldom seen, and maybe they 
dwell now deep in the woods and far from the northern 
border.’ 

‘Indeed deep in the wood they dwell,’ said Aragorn, and 
sighed as if some memory stirred in him. ‘We must fend for 
ourselves tonight. We will go forward a short way, until the 
trees are all about us, and then we will turn aside from the 
path and seek a place to rest in.’ 

He stepped forward; but Boromir stood irresolute and did 
not follow. ‘Is there no other way?’ he said. 

‘What other fairer way would you desire?’ said Aragorn. 

‘A plain road, though it led through a hedge of swords,’ 
said Boromir. “By strange paths has this Company been led, 
and so far to evil fortune. Against my will we passed under 
the shades of Moria, to our loss. And now we must enter the 
Golden Wood, you say. But of that perilous land we have 
heard in Gondor, and it is said that few come out who once 
go in; and of that few none have escaped unscathed.’ 

‘Say not unscathed, but if you say unchanged, then maybe 
you will speak the truth,’ said Aragorn. ‘But lore wanes in 
Gondor, Boromir, if in the city of those who once were wise 
they now speak evil of Lothlorien. Believe what you will, 
there is no other way for us — unless you would go back to 
Moria-gate, or scale the pathless mountains, or swim the 
Great River all alone.’ 

“Then lead on!’ said Boromir. ‘But it is perilous.’ 

‘Perilous indeed,’ said Aragorn, ‘fair and perilous; but only 
evil need fear it, or those who bring some evil with them. 
Follow me!’ 


They had gone little more than a mile into the forest when 
they came upon another stream flowing down swiftly from 
the tree-clad slopes that climbed back westward towards the 
mountains. They heard it splashing over a fall away among 
the shadows on their right. Its dark hurrying waters ran across 


LOTHLORIEN 441 


the path before them, and joined the Silverlode in a swirl of 
dim pools among the roots of trees. 

‘Here is Nimrodel!’ said Legolas. ‘Of this stream the Silvan 
Elves made many songs long ago, and still we sing them in 
the North, remembering the rainbow on its falls, and the 
golden flowers that floated in its foam. All is dark now and 
the Bridge of Nimrodel is broken down. I will bathe my feet, 
for it is said that the water is healing to the weary.’ He went 
forward and climbed down the deep-cloven bank and stepped 
into the stream. 

‘Follow me!’ he cried. “The water is not deep. Let us wade 
across! On the further bank we can rest, and the sound of 
the falling water may bring us sleep and forgetfulness of 
grief.’ 

One by one they climbed down and followed Legolas. For 
a moment Frodo stood near the brink and let the water flow 
over his tired feet. It was cold but its touch was clean, and as 
he went on and it mounted to his knees, he felt that the stain 
of travel and all weariness was washed from his limbs. 


When all the Company had crossed, they sat and rested 
and ate a little food; and Legolas told them tales of Lothlorien 
that the Elves of Mirkwood still kept in their hearts, of sun- 
light and starlight upon the meadows by the Great River 
before the world was grey. 

At length a silence fell, and they heard the music of the 
waterfall running sweetly in the shadows. Almost Frodo 
fancied that he could hear a voice singing, mingled with 
the sound of the water. 

‘Do you hear the voice of Nimrodel?’ asked Legolas. ‘I will 
sing you a song of the maiden Nimrodel, who bore the same 
name as the stream beside which she lived long ago. It is a 
fair song in our woodland tongue; but this is how it runs in 
the Westron Speech, as some in Rivendell now sing it.’ In a 
soft voice hardly to be heard amid the rustle of the leaves 
above them he began: 


442 


THE FELLOWSHIP OF THE RING 


An Elven-maid there was of old, 
A shining star by day: 

Her mantle white was hemmed with gold, 
Her shoes of silver-grey. 


A star was bound upon her brows, 
A light was on her hair 

As sun upon the golden boughs 
In Lorien the fair. 


Her hair was long, her limbs were white, 
And fair she was and free; 

And in the wind she went as light 
As leaf of linden-tree. 


Beside the falls of Nimrodel, 
By water clear and cool, 
Her voice as falling silver fell 

Into the shining pool. 


Where now she wanders none can tell, 
In sunlight or in shade; 

For lost of yore was Nimrodel 
And in the mountains strayed. 


The elven-ship in haven grey 
Beneath the mountain-lee 

Awaited her for many a day 
Beside the roaring sea. 


A wind by night in Northern lands 
Arose, and loud tt cried, 

And drove the ship from elven-strands 
Across the streaming tide. 


LOTHLORIEN 443 


When dawn came dim the land was lost, 
The mountains sinking grey 

Beyond the heaving waves that tossed 
Their plumes of blinding spray. 


Amroth beheld the fading shore 
Now low beyond the swell, 

And cursed the faithless ship that bore 
Fim far from Nimrodel. 


Of old he was an Elven-king, 
A lord of tree and glen, 

When golden were the boughs in spring 
In fair Lothlorien. 


From helm to sea they saw him leap, 
As arrow from the string, 

And dive into the water deep, 
As mew upon the wing. 


The wind was in his flowing hair, 
The foam about him shone; 

Afar they saw him strong and fair 
Go riding like a swan. 


But from the West has come no word, 
And on the Hither Shore 

No tidings Elven-folk have heard 
Of Amroth evermore. 


The voice of Legolas faltered, and the song ceased. ‘I can- 
not sing any more,’ he said. “That is but a part, for I have 
forgotten much. It is long and sad, for it tells how sorrow 
came upon Lothlorien, Lorien of the Blossom, when the 
Dwarves awakened evil in the mountains.’ 

‘But the Dwarves did not make the evil,’ said Gimli. 

‘T said not so; yet evil came,’ answered Legolas sadly. “Then 


444 THE FELLOWSHIP OF THE RING 


many of the Elves of Nimrodel’s kindred left their dwellings 
and departed, and she was lost far in the South, in the passes 
of the White Mountains; and she came not to the ship where 
Amroth her lover waited for her. But in the spring when the 
wind is in the new leaves the echo of her voice may still be 
heard by the falls that bear her name. And when the wind is 
in the South the voice of Amroth comes up from the sea; for 
Nimrodel flows into Silverlode, that Elves call Celebrant, and 
Celebrant into Anduin the Great, and Anduin flows into the 
Bay of Belfalas whence the Elves of Lorien set sail. But 
neither Nimrodel nor Amroth came ever back. 

‘It is told that she had a house built in the branches of a 
tree that grew near the falls; for that was the custom of the 
Elves of Lorien, to dwell in the trees, and maybe it is so still. 
Therefore they were called the Galadhrim, the Tree-people. 
Deep in their forest the trees are very great. The people of 
the woods did not delve in the ground like Dwarves, nor 
build strong places of stone before the Shadow came.’ 

‘And even in these latter days dwelling in the trees might 
be thought safer than sitting on the ground,’ said Gimli. He 
looked across the stream to the road that led back to Dimrill 
Dale, and then up into the roof of dark boughs above. 

‘Your words bring good counsel, Gimli,’ said Aragorn. 
‘We cannot build a house, but tonight we will do as the 
Galadhrim and seek refuge in the tree-tops, if we can. We 
have sat here beside the road already longer than was wise.’ 


The Company now turned aside from the path, and went 
into the shadow of the deeper woods, westward along the 
mountain-stream away from Silverlode. Not far from the falls 
of Nimrodel they found a cluster of trees, some of which 
overhung the stream. Their great grey trunks were of mighty 
girth, but their height could not be guessed. 

‘T will climb up,’ said Legolas. ‘I am at home among trees, 
by root or bough, though these trees are of a kind strange to 
me, save as a name in song. Mellyrn they are called, and are 
those that bear the yellow blossom, but I have never climbed 


LOTHLORIEN 445 


in one. I will see now what is their shape and way of growth.’ 

‘Whatever it may be,’ said Pippin, ‘they will be marvellous 
trees indeed if they can offer any rest at night, except to birds. 
I cannot sleep on a perch!’ 

“Then dig a hole in the ground,’ said Legolas, ‘if that is more 
after the fashion of your kind. But you must dig swift and deep, 
if you wish to hide from Orcs.’ He sprang lightly up from the 
ground and caught a branch that grew from the trunk high 
above his head. But even as he swung there for a moment, a 
voice spoke suddenly from the tree-shadows above him. 

‘Daro!’ it said in commanding tone, and Legolas dropped 
back to earth in surprise and fear. He shrank against the bole 
of the tree. 

‘Stand still!’ he whispered to the others. ‘Do not move or 
speak!’ 

There was a sound of soft laughter over their heads, and 
then another clear voice spoke in an elven-tongue. Frodo 
could understand little of what was said, for the speech that 
the Silvan folk east of the mountains used among themselves 
was unlike that of the West. Legolas looked up and answered 
in the same language.* 

‘Who are they, and what do they say?’ asked Merry. 

“They’re Elves,’ said Sam. ‘Can’t you hear their voices?’ 

“Yes, they are Elves,’ said Legolas; ‘and they say that you 
breathe so loud that they could shoot you in the dark.’ Sam 
hastily put his hand over his mouth. ‘But they say also that 
you need have no fear. They have been aware of us for a 
long while. They heard my voice across the Nimrodel, and 
knew that I was one of their Northern kindred, and therefore 
they did not hinder our crossing; and afterwards they heard 
my song. Now they bid me climb up with Frodo; for they 
seem to have had some tidings of him and of our journey. 
The others they ask to wait a little, and to keep watch at the 
foot of the tree, until they have decided what is to be done.’ 

kK ok k 


* See note in Appendix F: Of the Elves. 


446 THE FELLOWSHIP OF THE RING 


Out of the shadows a ladder was let down: it was made of 
rope, silver-grey and glimmering in the dark, and though it 
looked slender it proved strong enough to bear many men. 
Legolas ran lightly up, and Frodo followed slowly; behind 
came Sam trying not to breathe loudly. The branches of the 
mallorn-tree grew out nearly straight from the trunk, and 
then swept upward; but near the top the main stem divided 
into a crown of many boughs, and among these they found 
that there had been built a wooden platform, or flet as such 
things were called in those days: the Elves called it a talan. It 
was reached by a round hole in the centre through which the 
ladder passed. 

When Frodo came at last up on to the flet he found Legolas 
seated with three other Elves. They were clad in shadowy- 
grey, and could not be seen among the tree-stems, unless 
they moved suddenly. They stood up, and one of them 
uncovered a small lamp that gave out a slender silver beam. 
He held it up, looking at Frodo’s face, and Sam’s. Then he 
shut off the light again, and spoke words of welcome in his 
elven-tongue. Frodo spoke haltingly in return. 

‘Welcome!’ the Elf then said again in the Common Lan- 
guage, speaking slowly. ‘We seldom use any tongue but our 
own; for we dwell now in the heart of the forest, and do not 
willingly have dealings with any other folk. Even our own 
kindred in the North are sundered from us. But there are 
some of us still who go abroad for the gathering of news and 
the watching of our enemies, and they speak the languages 
of other lands. I am one. Haldir is my name. My brothers, 
Rumil and Orophin, speak little of your tongue. 

‘But we have heard rumours of your coming, for the mess- 
engers of Elrond passed by Lorien on their way home up the 
Dimrill Stair. We had not heard of — hobbits, of halflings, for 
many a long year, and did not know that any yet dwelt in 
Middle-earth. You do not look evil! And since you come with 
an Elf of our kindred, we are willing to befriend you, as Elrond 
asked; though it is not our custom to lead strangers through 
our land. But you must stay here tonight. How many are you?’ 


LOTHLORIEN 447 


‘Eight,’ said Legolas. ‘Myself, four hobbits; and two men, 
one of whom, Aragorn, is an Elf-friend of the folk of 
Westernesse.’ 

“The name of Aragorn son of Arathorn is known in Lorien,’ 
said Haldir, ‘and he has the favour of the Lady. All then is 
well. But you have yet spoken only of seven.’ 

“The eighth is a dwarf,’ said Legolas. 

‘A dwarf! said Haldir. “That is not well. We have not had 
dealings with the Dwarves since the Dark Days. They are 
not permitted in our land. I cannot allow him to pass.’ 

‘But he is from the Lonely Mountain, one of Dain’s trusty 
people, and friendly to Elrond,’ said Frodo. ‘Elrond himself 
chose him to be one of our companions, and he has been 
brave and faithful.’ 

The Elves spoke together in soft voices, and questioned 
Legolas in their own tongue. ‘Very good,’ said Haldir at last. 
‘We will do this, though it is against our liking. If Aragorn 
and Legolas will guard him, and answer for him, he shall 
pass; but he must go blindfold through Lothlorien. 

‘But now we must debate no longer. Your folk must not 
remain on the ground. We have been keeping watch on the 
rivers, ever since we saw a great troop of Orcs going north 
towards Moria, along the skirts of the mountains, many days 
ago. Wolves are howling on the wood’s borders. If you have 
indeed come from Moria, the peril cannot be far behind. 
‘Tomorrow early you must go on. 

“The four hobbits shall climb up here and stay with us — 
we do not fear them! There is another talan in the next 
tree. There the others must take refuge. You, Legolas, must 
answer to us for them. Call us, if anything is amiss! And have 
an eye on that dwarf!’ 


Legolas at once went down the ladder to take Haldir’s 
message; and soon afterwards Merry and Pippin clambered 
up on to the high flet. They were out of breath and seemed 
rather scared. 

“There!” said Merry panting. ‘We have lugged up your 


448 THE FELLOWSHIP OF THE RING 


blankets as well as our own. Strider has hidden all the rest of 
our baggage in a deep drift of leaves.’ 

“You had no need of your burdens,’ said Haldir. ‘It is cold 
in the tree-tops in winter, though the wind tonight is in the 
South; but we have food and drink to give you that will drive 
away the night-chill, and we have skins and cloaks to spare.’ 

The hobbits accepted this second (and far better) supper 
very gladly. Then they wrapped themselves warmly, not only 
in the fur-cloaks of the Elves, but in their own blankets as 
well, and tried to go to sleep. But weary as they were only 
Sam found that easy to do. Hobbits do not like heights, and 
do not sleep upstairs, even when they have any stairs. The 
flet was not at all to their liking as a bedroom. It had no walls, 
not even a rail; only on one side was there a light plaited 
screen, which could be moved and fixed in different places 
according to the wind. 

Pippin went on talking for a while. ‘I hope, if I do go to 
sleep in this bird-loft, that I shan’t roll off,’ he said. 

‘Once I do get to sleep,’ said Sam, ‘I shall go on sleeping, 
whether I roll off or no. And the less said, the sooner Ill drop 
off, if you take my meaning.’ 


Frodo lay for some time awake, and looked up at the stars 
glinting through the pale roof of quivering leaves. Sam was 
snoring at his side long before he himself closed his eyes. He 
could dimly see the grey forms of two elves sitting motionless 
with their arms about their knees, speaking in whispers. The 
other had gone down to take up his watch on one of the lower 
branches. At last lulled by the wind in the boughs above, and 
the sweet murmur of the falls of Nimrodel below, Frodo fell 
asleep with the song of Legolas running in his mind. 

Late in the night he woke. The other hobbits were asleep. 
The Elves were gone. The sickle Moon was gleaming dimly 
among the leaves. The wind was still. A little way off he heard 
a harsh laugh and the tread of many feet on the ground 
below. There was a ring of metal. The sounds died slowly 
away, and seemed to go southward, on into the wood. 


LOTHLORIEN 449 


A head appeared suddenly through the hole in the flet. 
Frodo sat up in alarm and saw that it was a grey-hooded EIf. 
He looked towards the hobbits. 

‘What is it?’ said Frodo. 

‘Yrch!’ said the Elf in a hissing whisper, and cast on to the 
flet the rope-ladder rolled up. 

‘Orcs!’ said Frodo. ‘What are they doing?’ But the Elf had 
gone. 

There were no more sounds. Even the leaves were silent, 
and the very falls seemed to be hushed. Frodo sat and shiv- 
ered in his wraps. He was thankful that they had not been 
caught on the ground; but he felt that the trees offered little 
protection, except concealment. Orcs were as keen as hounds 
on a scent, it was said, but they could also climb. He drew 
out Sting: it flashed and glittered like a blue flame; and then 
slowly faded again and grew dull. In spite of the fading of his 
sword the feeling of immediate danger did not leave Frodo, 
rather it grew stronger. He got up and crawled to the opening 
and peered down. He was almost certain that he could hear 
stealthy movements at the tree’s foot far below. 

Not Elves; for the woodland folk were altogether noiseless 
in their movements. Then he heard faintly a sound like 
sniffing; and something seemed to be scrabbling on the bark 
of the tree-trunk. He stared down into the dark, holding his 
breath. 

Something was now climbing slowly, and its breath came 
like a soft hissing through closed teeth. Then coming up, 
close to the stem, Frodo saw two pale eyes. They stopped 
and gazed upward unwinking. Suddenly they turned away, 
and a shadowy figure slipped round the trunk of the tree and 
vanished. 

Immediately afterwards Haldir came climbing swiftly up 
through the branches. “There was something in this tree that 
I have never seen before,’ he said. ‘It was not an orc. It fled 
as soon as I touched the tree-stem. It seemed to be wary, and 
to have some skill in trees, or I might have thought that it 
was one of you hobbits. 


450 THE FELLOWSHIP OF THE RING 


‘T did not shoot, for I dared not arouse any cries: we cannot 
risk battle. A strong company of Orcs has passed. They 
crossed the Nimrodel — curse their foul feet in its clean water! 
— and went on down the old road beside the river. They 
seemed to pick up some scent, and they searched the ground 
for a while near the place where you halted. The three of us 
could not challenge a hundred, so we went ahead and spoke 
with feigned voices, leading them on into the wood. 

‘Orophin has now gone in haste back to our dwellings to 
warn our people. None of the Orcs will ever return out of 
Lorien. And there will be many Elves hidden on the northern 
border before another night falls. But you must take the road 
south as soon as it is fully light.’ 


Day came pale from the East. As the light grew it filtered 
through the yellow leaves of the mallorn, and it seemed to 
the hobbits that the early sun of a cool summer’s morning was 
shining. Pale-blue sky peeped among the moving branches. 
Looking through an opening on the south side of the flet 
Frodo saw all the valley of the Silverlode lying like a sea of 
fallow gold tossing gently in the breeze. 

The morning was still young and cold when the Company 
set out again, guided now by Haldir and his brother Rumil. 
‘Farewell, sweet Nimrodel!’ cried Legolas. Frodo looked back 
and caught a gleam of white foam among the grey tree-stems. 
‘Farewell,’ he said. It seemed to him that he would never 
hear again a running water so beautiful, for ever blending its 
innumerable notes in an endless changeful music. 

They went back to the path that still went on along the 
west side of the Silverlode, and for some way they followed 
it southward. There were the prints of orc-feet in the earth. 
But soon Haldir turned aside into the trees and halted on the 
bank of the river under their shadows. 

“There is one of my people yonder across the stream,’ he 
said, ‘though you may not see him.’ He gave a call like the 
low whistle of a bird, and out of a thicket of young trees an 
Elf stepped, clad in grey, but with his hood thrown back; his 


LOTHLORIEN 451 


hair glinted like gold in the morning sun. Haldir skilfully cast 
over the stream a coil of grey rope, and he caught it and 
bound the end about a tree near the bank. 

‘Celebrant is already a strong stream here, as you see,’ said 
Haldir, ‘and it runs both swift and deep, and is very cold. We 
do not set foot in it so far north, unless we must. But in these 
days of watchfulness we do not make bridges. This is how 
we cross! Follow me!’ He made his end of the rope fast about 
another tree, and then ran lightly along it, over the river and 
back again, as if he were on a road. 

‘T can walk this path,’ said Legolas; ‘but the others have 
not this skill. Must they swim?’ 

‘No!’ said Haldir. ‘We have two more ropes. We will fasten 
them above the other, one shoulder-high, and another half- 
high, and holding these the strangers should be able to cross 
with care.’ 

When this slender bridge had been made, the Company 
passed over, some cautiously and slowly, others more easily. 
Of the hobbits Pippin proved the best for he was sure-footed, 
and he walked over quickly, holding only with one hand; but 
he kept his eyes on the bank ahead and did not look down. 
Sam shuffled along, clutching hard, and looking down into 
the pale eddying water as if it was a chasm in the mountains. 

He breathed with relief when he was safely across. “Live 
and learn! as my gaffer used to say. Though he was thinking 
of gardening, not of roosting like a bird, nor of trying to walk 
like a spider. Not even my uncle Andy ever did a trick like 
that!’ 

When at length all the Company was gathered on the east 
bank of the Silverlode, the Elves untied the ropes and coiled 
two of them. Rumil, who had remained on the other side, 
drew back the last one, slung it on his shoulder, and with a 
wave of his hand went away, back to Nimrodel to keep watch. 

‘Now, friends,’ said Haldir, ‘you have entered the Naith of 
Lorien, or the Gore, as you would say, for it is the land 
that lies like a spearhead between the arms of Silverlode and 
Anduin the Great. We allow no strangers to spy out the 


452 THE FELLOWSHIP OF THE RING 


secrets of the Naith. Few indeed are permitted even to set 
foot there. 

‘As was agreed, I shall here blindfold the eyes of Gimli the 
Dwarf. The others may walk free for a while, until we come 
nearer to our dwellings, down in Egladil, in the Angle between 
the waters.’ 

This was not at all to the liking of Gimli. “The agreement was 
made without my consent,’ he said. ‘I will not walk blindfold, 
like a beggar ora prisoner. AndIam no spy. My folk have never 
had dealings with any of the servants of the Enemy. Neither 
have we done harm to the Elves. Iam no more likely to betray 
you than Legolas, or any other of my companions.’ 

‘I do not doubt you,’ said Haldir. ‘Yet this is our law. I am 
not the master of the law, and cannot set it aside. I have done 
much in letting you set foot over Celebrant.’ 

Gimli was obstinate. He planted his feet firmly apart, and 
laid his hand upon the haft of his axe. ‘I will go forward free,’ 
he said, ‘or I will go back and seek my own land, where I 
am known to be true of word, though I perish alone in the 
wilderness.’ 

“You cannot go back,’ said Haldir sternly. ‘Now you have 
come thus far, you must be brought before the Lord and the 
Lady. They shall judge you, to hold you or to give you leave, 
as they will. You cannot cross the rivers again, and behind 
you there are now secret sentinels that you cannot pass. You 
would be slain before you saw them.’ 

Gimli drew his axe from his belt. Haldir and his companion 
bent their bows. ‘A plague on Dwarves and their stiff necks!’ 
said Legolas. 

‘Come!’ said Aragorn. ‘If I am still to lead this Company, 
you must do as I bid. It is hard upon the Dwarf to be thus 
singled out. We will all be blindfold, even Legolas. That will 
be best, though it will make the journey slow and dull.’ 

Gimli laughed suddenly. ‘A merry troop of fools we shall 
look! Will Haldir lead us all on a string, like many blind 
beggars with one dog? But I will be content, if only Legolas 
here shares my blindness.’ 


LOTHLORIEN 453 


‘Tam an Elf and a kinsman here,’ said Legolas, becoming 
angry in his turn. 

‘Now let us cry: “‘a plague on the stiff necks of Elves!’’ 
said Aragorn. “But the Company shall all fare alike. Come, 
bind our eyes, Haldir!’ 

‘T shall claim full amends for every fall and stubbed toe, if 
you do not lead us well,’ said Gimli as they bound a cloth 
about his eyes. 

“You will have no claim,’ said Haldir. ‘I shall lead you well, 
and the paths are smooth and straight.’ 

‘Alas for the folly of these days!’ said Legolas. ‘Here all are 
enemies of the one Enemy, and yet I must walk blind, while 
the sun is merry in the woodland under leaves of gold!’ 

‘Folly it may seem,’ said Haldir. ‘Indeed in nothing is the 
power of the Dark Lord more clearly shown than in the 
estrangement that divides all those who still oppose him. Yet 
so little faith and trust do we find now in the world beyond 
Lothlorien, unless maybe in Rivendell, that we dare not by 
our own trust endanger our land. We live now upon an island 
amid many perils, and our hands are more often upon the 
bowstring than upon the harp. 

“The rivers long defended us, but they are a sure guard no 
more; for the Shadow has crept northward all about us. Some 
speak of departing, yet for that it already seems too late. The 
mountains to the west are growing evil; to the east the lands 
are waste, and full of Sauron’s creatures; and it is rumoured 
that we cannot now safely pass southward through Rohan, 
and the mouths of the Great River are watched by the Enemy. 
Even if we could come to the shores of the Sea, we should 
find no longer any shelter there. It is said that there are still 
havens of the High Elves, but they are far north and west, 
beyond the land of the Halflings. But where that may be, 
though the Lord and Lady may know, I do not.’ 

“You ought at least to guess, since you have seen us,’ said 
Merry. “There are Elf-havens west of my land, the Shire, 
where Hobbits live.’ 

‘Happy folk are Hobbits to dwell near the shores of the 


454 THE FELLOWSHIP OF THE RING 


sea!’ said Haldir. ‘It is long indeed since any of my folk have 
looked on it, yet still we remember it in song. Tell me of these 
havens as we walk.’ 

‘IT cannot,’ said Merry. ‘I have never seen them. I have 
never been out of my own land before. And if I had known 
what the world outside was like, I don’t think I should have 
had the heart to leave it.’ 

‘Not even to see fair Lothlorien?’ said Haldir. “he world 
is indeed full of peril, and in it there are many dark places; 
but still there is much that is fair, and though in all lands love 
is now mingled with grief, it grows perhaps the greater. 

‘Some there are among us who sing that the Shadow will 
draw back, and peace shall come again. Yet I do not believe 
that the world about us will ever again be as it was of old, or 
the light of the Sun as it was aforetime. For the Elves, I fear, 
it will prove at best a truce, in which they may pass to the 
Sea unhindered and leave the Middle-earth for ever. Alas for 
Lothlorien that I love! It would be a poor life in a land where 
no mallorn grew. But if there are mallorn-trees beyond the 
Great Sea, none have reported it.’ 

As they spoke thus, the Company filed slowly along the 
paths in the wood, led by Haldir, while the other Elf walked 
behind. They felt the ground beneath their feet smooth and 
soft, and after a while they walked more freely, without fear 
of hurt or fall. Being deprived of sight, Frodo found his 
hearing and other senses sharpened. He could smell the trees 
and the trodden grass. He could hear many different notes 
in the rustle of the leaves overhead, the river murmuring 
away on his right, and the thin clear voices of birds high in 
the sky. He felt the sun upon his face and hands when they 
passed through an open glade. 

As soon as he set foot upon the far bank of Silverlode a 
strange feeling had come upon him, and it deepened as he 
walked on into the Naith: it seemed to him that he had 
stepped over a bridge of time into a corner of the Elder 
Days, and was now walking in a world that was no more. In 
Rivendell there was memory of ancient things; in Lorien the 


LOTHLORIEN 455 


ancient things still lived on in the waking world. Evil had 
been seen and heard there, sorrow had been known; the Elves 
feared and distrusted the world outside: wolves were howling 
on the wood’s borders: but on the land of Lorien no shadow 
lay. 


All that day the Company marched on, until they felt the 
cool evening come and heard the early night-wind whispering 
among many leaves. Then they rested and slept without fear 
upon the ground; for their guides would not permit them to 
unbind their eyes, and they could not climb. In the morning 
they went on again, walking without haste. At noon they 
halted, and Frodo was aware that they had passed out under 
the shining Sun. Suddenly he heard the sound of many voices 
all around him. 

A marching host of Elves had come up silently: they were 
hastening towards the northern borders to guard against any 
attack from Moria; and they brought news, some of which 
Haldir reported. The marauding orcs had been waylaid and 
almost all destroyed; the remnant had fled westward towards 
the mountains, and were being pursued. A strange creature 
also had been seen, running with bent back and with hands 
near the ground, like a beast and yet not of beast-shape. It 
had eluded capture, and they had not shot it, not knowing 
whether it was good or ill, and it had vanished down the 
Silverlode southward. 

‘Also,’ said Haldir, ‘they bring me a message from the Lord 
and Lady of the Galadhrim. You are all to walk free, even 
the dwarf Gimli. It seems that the Lady knows who and what 
is each member of your Company. New messages have come 
from Rivendell perhaps.’ 

He removed the bandage first from Gimli’s eyes. “Your 
pardon!’ he said, bowing low. ‘Look on us now with friendly 
eyes! Look and be glad, for you are the first dwarf to behold 
the trees of the Naith of Lorien since Durin’s Day!’ 

When his eyes were in turn uncovered, Frodo looked up 
and caught his breath. They were standing in an open space. 


456 THE FELLOWSHIP OF THE RING 


To the left stood a great mound, covered with a sward of 
grass as green as Springtime in the Elder Days. Upon it, as 
a double crown, grew two circles of trees: the outer had bark 
of snowy white, and were leafless but beautiful in their 
shapely nakedness; the inner were mallorn-trees of great 
height, still arrayed in pale gold. High amid the branches of 
a towering tree that stood in the centre of all there gleamed 
a white flet. At the feet of the trees, and all about the green 
hillsides the grass was studded with small golden flowers 
shaped like stars. Among them, nodding on slender stalks, 
were other flowers, white and palest green: they glimmered 
as a mist amid the rich hue of the grass. Over all the sky was 
blue, and the sun of afternoon glowed upon the hill and cast 
long green shadows beneath the trees. 

‘Behold! You are come to Cerin Amroth,’ said Haldir. ‘For 
this is the heart of the ancient realm as it was long ago, and 
here is the mound of Amroth, where in happier days his high 
house was built. Here ever bloom the winter flowers in the 
unfading grass: the yellow elanor, and the pale niphredil. Here 
we will stay awhile, and come to the city of the Galadhrim 
at dusk.’ 


The others cast themselves down upon the fragrant grass, 
but Frodo stood awhile still lost in wonder. It seemed to him 
that he had stepped through a high window that looked on a 
vanished world. A light was upon it for which his language 
had no name. All that he saw was shapely, but the shapes 
seemed at once clear cut, as if they had been first conceived 
and drawn at the uncovering of his eyes, and ancient as if 
they had endured for ever. He saw no colour but those he 
knew, gold and white and blue and green, but they were fresh 
and poignant, as if he had at that moment first perceived 
them and made for them names new and wonderful. In winter 
here no heart could mourn for summer or for spring. No 
blemish or sickness or deformity could be seen in anything 
that grew upon the earth. On the land of Lorien there was 
no stain. 


LOTHLORIEN 457 


He turned and saw that Sam was now standing beside him, 
looking round with a puzzled expression, and rubbing his 
eyes as if he was not sure that he was awake. ‘It’s sunlight 
and bright day, right enough,’ he said. ‘I thought that Elves 
were all for moon and stars: but this is more Elvish than 
anything I ever heard tell of. I feel as if I was inside a song, if 
you take my meaning.’ 

Haldir looked at them, and he seemed indeed to take the 
meaning of both thought and word. He smiled. ‘You feel the 
power of the Lady of the Galadhrim,’ he said. ‘Would it 
please you to climb with me up Cerin Amroth?’ 

They followed him as he stepped lightly up the grass-clad 
slopes. Though he walked and breathed, and about him living 
leaves and flowers were stirred by the same cool wind as 
fanned his face, Frodo felt that he was in a timeless land that 
did not fade or change or fall into forgetfulness. When he 
had gone and passed again into the outer world, still Frodo 
the wanderer from the Shire would walk there, upon the grass 
among elanor and niphredil in fair Lothlorien. 

They entered the circle of white trees. As they did so the 
South Wind blew upon Cerin Amroth and sighed among the 
branches. Frodo stood still, hearing far off great seas upon 
beaches that had long ago been washed away, and sea-birds 
crying whose race had perished from the earth. 

Haldir had gone on and was now climbing to the high flet. 
As Frodo prepared to follow him, he laid his hand upon the 
tree beside the ladder: never before had he been so suddenly 
and so keenly aware of the feel and texture of a tree’s skin 
and of the life within it. He felt a delight in wood and the 
touch of it, neither as forester nor as carpenter; it was the 
delight of the living tree itself. 

As he stepped out at last upon the lofty platform, Haldir 
took his hand and turned him towards the South. ‘Look this 
way first!’ he said. 

Frodo looked and saw, still at some distance, a hill of many 
mighty trees, or a city of green towers: which it was he could 
not tell. Out of it, it seemed to him that the power and light 


458 THE FELLOWSHIP OF THE RING 


came that held all the land in sway. He longed suddenly to 
fly like a bird to rest in the green city. Then he looked east- 
ward and saw all the land of Lorien running down to the pale 
gleam of Anduin, the Great River. He lifted his eyes across 
the river and all the light went out, and he was back again in 
the world he knew. Beyond the river the land appeared flat 
and empty, formless and vague, until far away it rose again 
like a wall, dark and drear. The sun that lay on Lothlorien 
had no power to enlighten the shadow of that distant height. 

“There lies the fastness of Southern Mirkwood,’ said 
Haldir. ‘It is clad in a forest of dark fir, where the trees strive 
one against another and their branches rot and wither. In the 
midst upon a stony height stands Dol Guldur, where long 
the hidden Enemy had his dwelling. We fear that now it is 
inhabited again, and with power sevenfold. A black cloud lies 
often over it of late. In this high place you may see the two 
powers that are opposed one to another; and ever they strive 
now in thought, but whereas the light perceives the very heart 
of the darkness, its own secret has not been discovered. Not 
yet.’ He turned and climbed swiftly down, and they followed 
him. 

At the hill’s foot Frodo found Aragorn, standing still and 
silent as a tree; but in his hand was a small golden bloom of 
elanor, and a light was in his eyes. He was wrapped in some 
fair memory: and as Frodo looked at him he knew that he 
beheld things as they once had been in this same place. For 
the grim years were removed from the face of Aragorn, and 
he seemed clothed in white, a young lord tall and fair; and 
he spoke words in the Elvish tongue to one whom Frodo 
could not see. Arwen vanimelda, namarié! he said, and then 
he drew a breath, and returning out of his thought he looked 
at Frodo and smiled. 

‘Here is the heart of Elvendom on earth,’ he said, ‘and here 
my heart dwells ever, unless there be a light beyond the dark 
roads that we still must tread, you and I. Come with me!’ 
And taking Frodo’s hand in his, he left the hill of Cerin 
Amroth and came there never again as living man. 


Chapter 7 


THE MIRROR OF GALADRIEL 


The sun was sinking behind the mountains, and the shadows 
were deepening in the woods, when they went on again. 
Their paths now went into thickets where the dusk had 
already gathered. Night came beneath the trees as they 
walked, and the Elves uncovered their silver lamps. 

Suddenly they came out into the open again and found 
themselves under a pale evening sky pricked by a few early 
stars. There was a wide treeless space before them, running 
in a great circle and bending away on either hand. Beyond it 
was a deep fosse lost in soft shadow, but the grass upon its 
brink was green, as if it glowed still in memory of the sun 
that had gone. Upon the further side there rose to a great 
height a green wall encircling a green hill thronged with 
mallorn-trees taller than any they had yet seen in all the 
land. Their height could not be guessed, but they stood 
up in the twilight like living towers. In their many-tiered 
branches and amid their ever-moving leaves countless lights 
were gleaming, green and gold and silver. Haldir turned 
towards the Company. 

‘Welcome to Caras Galadhon!’ he said. ‘Here is the city of 
the Galadhrim where dwell the Lord Celeborn and Galadriel 
the Lady of Lorien. But we cannot enter here, for the gates 
do not look northward. We must go round to the southern 
side, and the way is not short, for the city is great.’ 


There was a road paved with white stone running on the 
outer brink of the fosse. Along this they went westward, with 
the city ever climbing up like a green cloud upon their left; 
and as the night deepened more lights sprang forth, until all 
the hill seemed afire with stars. They came at last to a white 


460 THE FELLOWSHIP OF THE RING 


bridge, and crossing found the great gates of the city: they 
faced south-west, set between the ends of the encircling wall 
that here overlapped, and they were tall and strong, and hung 
with many lamps. 

Haldir knocked and spoke, and the gates opened sound- 
lessly; but of guards Frodo could see no sign. The travellers 
passed within, and the gates shut behind them. They were in 
a deep lane between the ends of the wall, and passing quickly 
through it they entered the City of the Trees. No folk could 
they see, nor hear any feet upon the paths; but there were 
many voices, about them, and in the air above. Far away up 
on the hill they could hear the sound of singing falling from 
on high like soft rain upon leaves. 

They went along many paths and climbed many stairs, 
until they came to the high places and saw before them amid 
a wide lawn a fountain shimmering. It was lit by silver lamps 
that swung from the boughs of trees, and it fell into a basin 
of silver, from which a white stream spilled. Upon the south 
side of the lawn there stood the mightiest of all the trees; its 
great smooth bole gleamed like grey silk, and up it towered, 
until its first branches, far above, opened their huge limbs 
under shadowy clouds of leaves. Beside it a broad white 
ladder stood, and at its foot three Elves were seated. They 
sprang up as the travellers approached, and Frodo saw that 
they were tall and clad in grey mail, and from their shoulders 
hung long white cloaks. 

‘Here dwell Celeborn and Galadriel,’ said Haldir. ‘It is their 
wish that you should ascend and speak with them.’ 

One of the Elf-wardens then blew a clear note on a small 
horn, and it was answered three times from far above. ‘I will 
go first,’ said Haldir. “Let Frodo come next and with him 
Legolas. The others may follow as they wish. It is a long 
climb for those that are not accustomed to such stairs, but 
you may rest upon the way.’ 


As he climbed slowly up Frodo passed many flets: some 
on one side, some on another, and some set about the bole 


THE MIRROR OF GALADRIEL 461 


of the tree, so that the ladder passed through them. At a great 
height above the ground he came to a wide talan, like the 
deck of a great ship. On it was built a house, so large that 
almost it would have served for a hall of Men upon the 
earth. He entered behind Haldir, and found that he was in a 
chamber of oval shape, in the midst of which grew the trunk 
of the great mallorn, now tapering towards its crown, and yet 
making still a pillar of wide girth. 

The chamber was filled with a soft light; its walls were 
green and silver and its roof of gold. Many Elves were seated 
there. On two chairs beneath the bole of the tree and canopied 
by a living bough there sat, side by side, Celeborn and 
Galadriel. They stood up to greet their guests, after the 
manner of Elves, even those who were accounted mighty 
kings. Very tall they were, and the Lady no less tall than the 
Lord; and they were grave and beautiful. They were clad 
wholly in white; and the hair of the Lady was of deep gold, 
and the hair of the Lord Celeborn was of silver long and 
bright; but no sign of age was upon them, unless it were in 
the depths of their eyes; for these were keen as lances in the 
starlight, and yet profound, the wells of deep memory. 

Haldir led Frodo before them, and the Lord welcomed him 
in his own tongue. The Lady Galadriel said no word but 
looked long upon his face. 

‘Sit now beside my chair, Frodo of the Shire!’ said Cele- 
born. ‘When all have come we will speak together.’ 

Each of the companions he greeted courteously by name 
as they entered. “Welcome Aragorn son of Arathorn!’ he said. 
‘It is eight and thirty years of the world outside since you 
came to this land; and those years lie heavy on you. But the 
end is near, for good or ill. Here lay aside your burden for a 
while!’ 

‘Welcome son of Thranduil! Too seldom do my kindred 
journey hither from the North.’ 

‘Welcome Gimli son of Gloin! It is long indeed since we 
saw one of Durin’s folk in Caras Galadhon. But today we 
have broken our long law. May it be a sign that though the 


462 THE FELLOWSHIP OF THE RING 


world is now dark better days are at hand, and that friendship 
shall be renewed between our peoples.’ Gimli bowed low. 


When all the guests were seated before his chair the Lord 
looked at them again. ‘Here there are eight,’ he said. “Nine 
were to set out: so said the messages. But maybe there has 
been some change of counsel that we have not heard. Elrond 
is far away, and darkness gathers between us, and all this year 
the shadows have grown longer.’ 

‘Nay, there was no change of counsel,’ said the Lady 
Galadriel, speaking for the first time. Her voice was clear and 
musical, but deeper than woman’s wont. ‘Gandalf the Grey 
set out with the Company, but he did not pass the borders 
of this land. Now tell us where he is; for I much desired to 
speak with him again. But I cannot see him from afar, unless 
he comes within the fences of Lothlorien: a grey mist is about 
him, and the ways of his feet and of his mind are hidden 
from me.’ 

‘Alas!’ said Aragorn. ‘Gandalf the Grey fell into shadow. 
He remained in Moria and did not escape.’ 

At these words all the Elves in the hall cried aloud in grief 
and amazement. “These are evil tidings,’ said Celeborn, ‘the 
most evil that have been spoken here in long years full of 
grievous deeds.’ He turned to Haldir. ‘Why has nothing of 
this been told to me before?’ he asked in the elven-tongue. 

‘We have not spoken to Haldir of our deeds or our pur- 
pose,’ said Legolas. ‘At first we were weary and danger was 
too close behind; and afterwards we almost forgot our grief 
for a time, as we walked in gladness on the fair paths of 
Lorien.’ 

‘Yet our grief is great and our loss cannot be mended,’ said 
Frodo. ‘Gandalf was our guide, and he led us through Moria; 
and when our escape seemed beyond hope he saved us, and 
he fell.’ 

“Tell us now the full tale!’ said Celeborn. 

Then Aragorn recounted all that had happened upon the 
pass of Caradhras, and in the days that followed; and he 


THE MIRROR OF GALADRIEL 463 


spoke of Balin and his book, and the fight in the Chamber 
of Mazarbul, and the fire, and the narrow bridge, and the 
coming of the Terror. ‘An evil of the Ancient World it 
seemed, such as I have never seen before,’ said Aragorn. ‘It 
was both a shadow and a flame, strong and terrible.’ 

‘It was a Balrog of Morgoth,’ said Legolas; ‘of all elf-banes 
the most deadly, save the One who sits in the Dark Tower.’ 

‘Indeed I saw upon the bridge that which haunts our dark- 
est dreams, I saw Durin’s Bane,’ said Gimli in a low voice, 
and dread was in his eyes. 

‘Alas! said Celeborn. ‘We long have feared that under 
Caradhras a terror slept. But had I known that the Dwarves 
had stirred up this evil in Moria again, I would have forbidden 
you to pass the northern borders, you and all that went with 
you. And if it were possible, one would say that at the last 
Gandalf fell from wisdom into folly, going needlessly into the 
net of Moria.’ 

‘He would be rash indeed that said that thing,’ said 
Galadriel gravely. ‘Needless were none of the deeds of 
Gandalf in life. Those that followed him knew not his mind 
and cannot report his full purpose. But however it may be 
with the guide, the followers are blameless. Do not repent 
of your welcome to the Dwarf. If our folk had been exiled 
long and far from Lothlorien, who of the Galadhrim, even 
Celeborn the Wise, would pass nigh and would not wish to 
look upon their ancient home, though it had become an abode 
of dragons? 

‘Dark is the water of Kheled-zaram, and cold are the 
springs of Kibil-nala, and fair were the many-pillared halls of 
Khazad-dtim in Elder Days before the fall of mighty kings 
beneath the stone.’ She looked upon Gimli, who sat glowering 
and sad, and she smiled. And the Dwarf, hearing the names 
given in his own ancient tongue, looked up and met her eyes; 
and it seemed to him that he looked suddenly into the heart 
of an enemy and saw there love and understanding. Wonder 
came into his face, and then he smiled in answer. 

He rose clumsily and bowed in dwarf-fashion, saying: ‘Yet 


464 THE FELLOWSHIP OF THE RING 


more fair is the living land of Lorien, and the Lady Galadriel 
is above all the jewels that lie beneath the earth!’ 


There was a silence. At length Celeborn spoke again. ‘I did 
not know that your plight was so evil,’ he said. ‘Let Gimli 
forget my harsh words: I spoke in the trouble of my heart. I 
will do what I can to aid you, each according to his wish and 
need, but especially that one of the little folk who bears the 
burden.’ 

“Your quest is known to us,’ said Galadriel, looking at 
Frodo. ‘But we will not here speak of it more openly. Yet not 
in vain will it prove, maybe, that you came to this land seeking 
aid, as Gandalf himself plainly purposed. For the Lord of the 
Galadhrim is accounted the wisest of the Elves of Middle- 
earth, and a giver of gifts beyond the power of kings. He has 
dwelt in the West since the days of dawn, and I have dwelt 
with him years uncounted; for ere the fall of Nargothrond or 
Gondolin I passed over the mountains, and together through 
ages of the world we have fought the long defeat. 

‘I it was who first summoned the White Council. And if 
my designs had not gone amiss, it would have been governed 
by Gandalf the Grey, and then mayhap things would have 
gone otherwise. But even now there is hope left. I will not 
give you counsel, saying do this, or do that. For not in doing 
or contriving, nor in choosing between this course and 
another, can I avail; but only in knowing what was and is, 
and in part also what shall be. But this I will say to you: your 
Quest stands upon the edge of a knife. Stray but a little and 
it will fail, to the ruin of all. Yet hope remains while all the 
Company is true.’ 

And with that word she held them with her eyes, and in 
silence looked searchingly at each of them in turn. None save 
Legolas and Aragorn could long endure her glance. Sam 
quickly blushed and hung his head. 

At length the Lady Galadriel released them from her eyes, 
and she smiled. ‘Do not let your hearts be troubled,’ she said. 
“Tonight you shall sleep in peace.’ Then they sighed and felt 


THE MIRROR OF GALADRIEL 465 


suddenly weary, as those who have been questioned long and 
deeply, though no words had been spoken openly. 

‘Go now!’ said Celeborn. “You are worn with sorrow and 
much toil. Even if your Quest did not concern us closely, you 
should have refuge in this City, until you were healed and 
refreshed. Now you shall rest, and we will not speak of your 
further road for a while.’ 


That night the Company slept upon the ground, much to 
the satisfaction of the hobbits. The Elves spread for them a 
pavilion among the trees near the fountain, and in it they laid 
soft couches; then speaking words of peace with fair Elvish 
voices they left them. For a little while the travellers talked of 
their night before in the tree-tops, and of their day’s journey, 
and of the Lord and Lady; for they had not yet the heart to 
look further back. 

‘What did you blush for, Sam?’ said Pippin. ‘You soon 
broke down. Anyone would have thought you had a guilty 
conscience. I hope it was nothing worse than a wicked plot 
to steal one of my blankets.’ 

‘Tnever thought no such thing,’ answered Sam, in no mood 
for jest. ‘If you want to know, I felt as if I hadn’t got nothing 
on, and I didn’t like it. She seemed to be looking inside me 
and asking me what I would do if she gave me the chance of 
flying back home to the Shire to a nice little hole with — with 
a bit of garden of my own.’ 

“That’s funny,’ said Merry. ‘Almost exactly what I felt 
myself; only, only well, I don’t think [ll say any more,’ he 
ended lamely. 

All of them, it seemed, had fared alike: each had felt that 
he was offered a choice between a shadow full of fear that 
lay ahead, and something that he greatly desired: clear before 
his mind it lay, and to get it he had only to turn aside from 
the road and leave the Quest and the war against Sauron to 
others. 

‘And it seemed to me, too,’ said Gimli, ‘that my choice 
would remain secret and known only to myself.’ 


466 THE FELLOWSHIP OF THE RING 


“To me it seemed exceedingly strange,’ said Boromir. 
‘Maybe it was only a test, and she thought to read our 
thoughts for her own good purpose; but almost I should 
have said that she was tempting us, and offering what she 
pretended to have the power to give. It need not be said that 
I refused to listen. The Men of Minas Tirith are true to their 
word.’ But what he thought that the Lady had offered him 
Boromir did not tell. 

And as for Frodo, he would not speak, though Boromir 
pressed him with questions. ‘She held you long in her gaze, 
Ring-bearer,’ he said. 

‘Yes,’ said Frodo; ‘but whatever came into my mind then 
I will keep there.’ 

‘Well, have a care!’ said Boromir. ‘I do not feel too sure of 
this Elvish Lady and her purposes.’ 

‘Speak no evil of the Lady Galadriel!’ said Aragorn sternly. 
“You know not what you say. There is in her and in this land 
no evil, unless a man bring it hither himself. Then let him 
beware! But tonight I shall sleep without fear for the first time 
since I left Rivendell. And may I sleep deep, and forget for a 
while my grief! I am weary in body and in heart.’ He cast 
himself down upon his couch and fell at once into a long 
sleep. 

The others soon did the same, and no sound or dream 
disturbed their slumber. When they woke they found that the 
light of day was broad upon the lawn before the pavilion, and 
the fountain rose and fell glittering in the sun. 


They remained some days in Lothlorien, so far as they 
could tell or remember. All the while that they dwelt there 
the sun shone clear, save for a gentle rain that fell at times, 
and passed away leaving all things fresh and clean. The air 
was cool and soft, as if it were early spring, yet they felt about 
them the deep and thoughtful quiet of winter. It seemed to 
them that they did little but eat and drink and rest, and walk 
among the trees; and it was enough. 

They had not seen the Lord and Lady again, and they had 


THE MIRROR OF GALADRIEL 467 


little speech with the Elven-folk; for few of these knew or 
would use the Westron tongue. Haldir had bidden them fare- 
well and gone back again to the fences of the North, where 
great watch was now kept since the tidings of Moria that the 
Company had brought. Legolas was away much among the 
Galadhrim, and after the first night he did not sleep with 
the other companions, though he returned to eat and talk 
with them. Often he took Gimli with him when he went 
abroad in the land, and the others wondered at this change. 

Now as the companions sat or walked together they spoke 
of Gandalf, and all that each had known and seen of him 
came clear before their minds. As they were healed of hurt 
and weariness of body the grief of their loss grew more keen. 
Often they heard nearby Elvish voices singing, and knew that 
they were making songs of lamentation for his fall, for they 
caught his name among the sweet sad words that they could 
not understand. 

Mithrandir, Mithrandir sang the Elves, O Pilgrim Grey! For 
so they loved to call him. But if Legolas was with the Com- 
pany, he would not interpret the songs for them, saying that 
he had not the skill, and that for him the grief was still too 
near, a matter for tears and not yet for song. 

It was Frodo who first put something of his sorrow into 
halting words. He was seldom moved to make song or rhyme; 
even in Rivendell he had listened and had not sung himself, 
though his memory was stored with many things that others 
had made before him. But now as he sat beside the fountain 
in Lorien and heard about him the voices of the Elves, his 
thought took shape in a song that seemed fair to him; yet 
when he tried to repeat it to Sam only snatches remained, 
faded as a handful of withered leaves. 


When evening in the Shire was grey 
his footsteps on the Hill were heard; 
before the dawn he went away 

on journey long without a word. 


468 THE FELLOWSHIP OF THE RING 


From Wilderland to Western shore, 
from northern waste to southern hill, 
through dragon-lair and hidden door 
and darkling woods he walked at will. 


With Dwarf and Hobbit, Elves and Men, 
with mortal and immortal folk, 

with bird on bough and beast in den, 

in their own secret tongues he spoke. 


A deadly sword, a healing hand, 
a back that bent beneath its load; 
a trumpet-voice, a burning brand, 
a weary pilgrim on the road. 


A lord of wisdom throned he sat, 
swift in anger, quick to laugh; 
an old man in a battered hat 
who leaned upon a thorny staff. 


He stood upon the bridge alone 
and Fire and Shadow both defied; 
his staff was broken on the stone, 
in Khazad-diim his wisdom died. 


‘Why, you'll be beating Mr. Bilbo next!’ said Sam. 

‘No, I am afraid not,’ said Frodo. ‘But that is the best I 
can do yet.’ 

‘Well, Mr. Frodo, if you do have another go, I hope you’ll 
say a word about his fireworks,’ said Sam. ‘Something like 
this: 


The finest rockets ever seen: 

they burst in stars of blue and green, 
or after thunder golden showers 
came falling like a rain of flowers. 


THE MIRROR OF GALADRIEL 469 


Though that doesn’t do them justice by a long road.’ 

‘No, Ill leave that to you, Sam. Or perhaps to Bilbo. 
But — well, I can’t talk of it any more. I can’t bear to think 
of bringing the news to him.’ 


One evening Frodo and Sam were walking together in 
the cool twilight. Both of them felt restless again. On Frodo 
suddenly the shadow of parting had fallen: he knew somehow 
that the time was very near when he must leave Lothlorien. 

‘What do you think of Elves now, Sam?’ he said. ‘I asked 
you the same question once before — it seems a very long 
while ago; but you have seen more of them since then.’ 

‘I have indeed!’ said Sam. ‘And I reckon there’s Elves and 
Elves. They’re all Elvish enough, but they’re not all the same. 
Now these folk aren’t wanderers or homeless, and seem a bit 
nearer to the likes of us: they seem to belong here, more even 
than Hobbits do in the Shire. Whether they’ve made the land, 
or the land’s made them, it’s hard to say, if you take my 
meaning. It’s wonderfully quiet here. Nothing seems to be 
going on, and nobody seems to want it to. If there’s any 
magic about, it’s right down deep, where I can’t lay my hands 
on it, in a manner of speaking.’ 

“You can see and feel it everywhere,’ said Frodo. 

‘Well,’ said Sam, ‘you can’t see nobody working it. No 
fireworks like poor old Gandalf used to show. I wonder we 
don’t see nothing of the Lord and Lady in all these days. 
I fancy now that she could do some wonderful things, if 
she had a mind. I’d dearly love to see some Elf-magic, Mr. 
Frodo!’ 

‘I wouldn’t,’ said Frodo. ‘I am content. And I don’t miss 
Gandalf’s fireworks, but his bushy eyebrows, and his quick 
temper, and his voice.’ 

‘You're right,’ said Sam. ‘And don’t think I’m finding fault. 
I’ve often wanted to see a bit of magic like what it tells of in 
old tales, but I’ve never heard of a better land than this. It’s 
like being at home and on a holiday at the same time, if you 
understand me. I don’t want to leave. All the same, I’m 


470 THE FELLOWSHIP OF THE RING 


beginning to feel that if we’ve got to go on, then we’d best 
get it over. 

‘It’s the job that’s never started as takes longest to finish, as 
my old gaffer used to say. And I don’t reckon that these folk 
can do much more to help us, magic or no. It’s when we leave 
this land that we shall miss Gandalf worse, I’m thinking.’ 

‘I am afraid that’s only too true, Sam,’ said Frodo. ‘Yet I 
hope very much that before we leave we shall see the Lady 
of the Elves again.’ 

Even as he spoke, they saw, as if she came in answer to 
their words, the Lady Galadriel approaching. ‘Tall and white 
and fair she walked beneath the trees. She spoke no word, 
but beckoned to them. 

Turning aside, she led them towards the southern slopes 
of the hill of Caras Galadhon, and passing through a high 
green hedge they came into an enclosed garden. No trees 
grew there, and it lay open to the sky. The evening star had 
risen and was shining with white fire above the western 
woods. Down a long flight of steps the Lady went into the 
deep green hollow, through which ran murmuring the silver 
stream that issued from the fountain on the hill. At the 
bottom, upon a low pedestal carved like a branching tree, 
stood a basin of silver, wide and shallow, and beside it stood 
a silver ewer. 

With water from the stream Galadriel filled the basin to 
the brim, and breathed on it, and when the water was still 
again she spoke. ‘Here is the Mirror of Galadriel,’ she said. 
‘I have brought you here so that you may look in it, if you 
will.’ 

The air was very still, and the dell was dark, and the EIf- 
lady beside him was tall and pale. ‘What shall we look for, 
and what shall we see?’ asked Frodo, filled with awe. 

‘Many things I can command the Mirror to reveal,’ she 
answered, ‘and to some I can show what they desire to see. 
But the Mirror will also show things unbidden, and those are 
often stranger and more profitable than things which we wish 
to behold. What you will see, if you leave the Mirror free to 


THE MIRROR OF GALADRIEL ATI 


work, I cannot tell. For it shows things that were, and things 
that are, and things that yet may be. But which it is that he 
sees, even the wisest cannot always tell. Do you wish to look?’ 

Frodo did not answer. 

‘And you?’ she said, turning to Sam. ‘For this is what your 
folk would call magic, I believe; though I do not understand 
clearly what they mean; and they seem to use the same word 
of the deceits of the Enemy. But this, if you will, is the 
magic of Galadriel. Did you not say that you wished to see 
Elf-magic?’ 

‘T did,’ said Sam, trembling a little between fear and curi- 
osity. ‘Pll have a peep, Lady, if you’re willing. 

‘And I’d not mind a glimpse of what’s going on at home,’ 
he said in an aside to Frodo. ‘It seems a terrible long time 
that ’ve been away. But there, like as not Pll only see the 
stars, or something that I won’t understand.’ 

‘Like as not,’ said the Lady with a gentle laugh. “But come, 
you shall look and see what you may. Do not touch the 
water!’ 

Sam climbed up on the foot of the pedestal and leaned 
over the basin. The water looked hard and dark. Stars were 
reflected in it. 

“There’s only stars, as I thought,’ he said. Then he gave a 
low gasp, for the stars went out. As if a dark veil had been 
withdrawn, the Mirror grew grey, and then clear. There was 
sun shining, and the branches of trees were waving and toss- 
ing in the wind. But before Sam could make up his mind 
what it was that he saw, the light faded; and now he thought 
he saw Frodo with a pale face lying fast asleep under a great 
dark cliff. Then he seemed to see himself going along a dim 
passage, and climbing an endless winding stair. It came to 
him suddenly that he was looking urgently for something, 
but what it was he did not know. Like a dream the vision 
shifted and went back, and he saw the trees again. But this 
time they were not so close, and he could see what was going 
on: they were not waving in the wind, they were falling, 
crashing to the ground. 


472 THE FELLOWSHIP OF THE RING 


‘Hil’ cried Sam in an outraged voice. “There’s that Ted 
Sandyman a-cutting down trees as he shouldn’t. They didn’t 
ought to be felled: it’s that avenue beyond the Mill that shades 
the road to Bywater. I wish I could get at Ted, and Id fell 
him! 

But now Sam noticed that the Old Mill had vanished, and 
a large red-brick building was being put up where it had 
stood. Lots of folk were busily at work. There was a tall red 
chimney nearby. Black smoke seemed to cloud the surface of 
the Mirror. 

“There’s some devilry at work in the Shire,’ he said. ‘Elrond 
knew what he was about when he wanted to send Mr. Merry 
back.’ Then suddenly Sam gave a cry and sprang away. ‘I 
can’t stay here,’ he said wildly. ‘I must go home. They’ve 
dug up Bagshot Row, and there’s the poor old Gaffer going 
down the Hill with his bits of things on a barrow. I must go 
home!’ 

“You cannot go home alone,’ said the Lady. ‘You did not 
wish to go home without your master before you looked in 
the Mirror, and yet you knew that evil things might well be 
happening in the Shire. Remember that the Mirror shows 
many things, and not all have yet come to pass. Some never 
come to be, unless those that behold the visions turn aside 
from their path to prevent them. The Mirror is dangerous as 
a guide of deeds.’ 

Sam sat on the ground and put his head in his hands. ‘I 
wish I had never come here, and I don’t want to see no more 
magic,’ he said and fell silent. After a moment he spoke again 
thickly, as if struggling with tears. ‘No, I'll go home by the 
long road with Mr. Frodo, or not at all,’ he said. ‘But I hope 
I do get back some day. If what I’ve seen turns out true, 
somebody’s going to catch it hot!’ 


‘Do you now wish to look, Frodo?’ said the Lady Galadriel. 
“You did not wish to see Elf-magic and were content.’ 

‘Do you advise me to look?’ asked Frodo. 

‘No,’ she said. ‘I do not counsel you one way or the other. 


THE MIRROR OF GALADRIEL 473 


Iam nota counsellor. You may learn something, and whether 
what you see be fair or evil, that may be profitable, and yet 
it may not. Seeing is both good and perilous. Yet I think, 
Frodo, that you have courage and wisdom enough for the 
venture, or I would not have brought you here. Do as you 
will!’ 

‘T will look,’ said Frodo, and he climbed on the pedestal 
and bent over the dark water. At once the Mirror cleared and 
he saw a twilit land. Mountains loomed dark in the distance 
against a pale sky. A long grey road wound back out of sight. 
Far away a figure came slowly down the road, faint and 
small at first, but growing larger and clearer as it approached. 
Suddenly Frodo realized that it reminded him of Gandalf. 
He almost called aloud the wizard’s name, and then he saw 
that the figure was clothed not in grey but in white, in a white 
that shone faintly in the dusk; and in its hand there was a 
white staff. The head was so bowed that he could see no face, 
and presently the figure turned aside round a bend in the 
road and went out of the Mirror’s view. Doubt came into 
Frodo’s mind: was this a vision of Gandalf on one of his 
many lonely journeys long ago, or was it Saruman? 

The vision now changed. Brief and small but very vivid he 
caught a glimpse of Bilbo walking restlessly about his room. 
The table was littered with disordered papers; rain was beat- 
ing on the windows. 

Then there was a pause, and after it many swift scenes 
followed that Frodo in some way knew to be parts of a great 
history in which he had become involved. The mist cleared 
and he saw a sight which he had never seen before but knew 
at once: the Sea. Darkness fell. The sea rose and raged in a 
great storm. Then he saw against the Sun, sinking blood-red 
into a wrack of clouds, the black outline of a tall ship with 
torn sails riding up out of the West. Then a wide river flowing 
through a populous city. Then a white fortress with seven 
towers. And then again a ship with black sails, but now it was 
morning again, and the water rippled with light, and a banner 
bearing the emblem of a white tree shone in the sun. A smoke 


474 THE FELLOWSHIP OF THE RING 


as of fire and battle arose, and again the sun went down in a 
burning red that faded into a grey mist; and into the mist a 
small ship passed away, twinkling with lights. It vanished, 
and Frodo sighed and prepared to draw away. 

But suddenly the Mirror went altogether dark, as dark as 
if a hole had opened in the world of sight, and Frodo looked 
into emptiness. In the black abyss there appeared a single 
Eye that slowly grew, until it filled nearly all the Mirror. So 
terrible was it that Frodo stood rooted, unable to cry out or 
to withdraw his gaze. The Eye was rimmed with fire, but was 
itself glazed, yellow as a cat’s, watchful and intent, and the 
black slit of its pupil opened on a pit, a window into nothing. 

Then the Eye began to rove, searching this way and that; 
and Frodo knew with certainty and horror that among the 
many things that it sought he himself was one. But he also 
knew that it could not see him — not yet, not unless he willed 
it. The Ring that hung upon its chain about his neck grew 
heavy, heavier than a great stone, and his head was dragged 
downwards. The Mirror seemed to be growing hot and curls 
of steam were rising from the water. He was slipping forward. 

‘Do not touch the water!’ said the Lady Galadriel softly. 
The vision faded, and Frodo found that he was looking at 
the cool stars twinkling in the silver basin. He stepped back 
shaking all over and looked at the Lady. 

‘I know what it was that you last saw,’ she said; ‘for that is 
also in my mind. Do not be afraid! But do not think that only 
by singing amid the trees, nor even by the slender arrows 
of elven-bows, is this land of Lothlorien maintained and 
defended against its Enemy. I say to you, Frodo, that even 
as I speak to you, I perceive the Dark Lord and know his 
mind, or all of his mind that concerns the Elves. And he 
gropes ever to see me and my thought. But still the door is 
closed!’ 

She lifted up her white arms, and spread out her hands 
towards the East in a gesture of rejection and denial. Eaérendil, 
the Evening Star, most beloved of the Elves, shone clear 
above. So bright was it that the figure of the Elven-lady cast 


THE MIRROR OF GALADRIEL 475 


a dim shadow on the ground. Its rays glanced upon a ring 
about her finger; it glittered like polished gold overlaid with 
silver light, and a white stone in it twinkled as if the Even- 
star had come down to rest upon her hand. Frodo gazed at 
the ring with awe; for suddenly it seemed to him that he 
understood. 

‘Yes,’ she said, divining his thought, ‘it is not permitted to 
speak of it, and Elrond could not do so. But it cannot be 
hidden from the Ring-bearer, and one who has seen the Eye. 
Verily it is in the land of Lorien upon the finger of Galadriel 
that one of the Three remains. This is Nenya, the Ring of 
Adamant, and I am its keeper. 

‘He suspects, but he does not know — not yet. Do you not 
see now wherefore your coming is to us as the footstep of 
Doom? For if you fail, then we are laid bare to the Enemy. 
Yet if you succeed, then our power is diminished, and 
Lothlorien will fade, and the tides of Time will sweep it away. 
We must depart into the West, or dwindle to a rustic folk of 
dell and cave, slowly to forget and to be forgotten.’ 

Frodo bent his head. ‘And what do you wish?’ he said at 
last. 

“That what should be shall be,’ she answered. “The love of 
the Elves for their land and their works is deeper than the 
deeps of the Sea, and their regret is undying and cannot ever 
wholly be assuaged. Yet they will cast all away rather than 
submit to Sauron: for they know him now. For the fate of 
Lothlorien you are not answerable, but only for the doing of 
your own task. Yet I could wish, were it of any avail, that the 
One Ring had never been wrought, or had remained for ever 
lost.’ 

“You are wise and fearless and fair, Lady Galadriel,’ said 
Frodo. ‘I will give you the One Ring, if you ask for it. It is 
too great a matter for me.’ 

Galadriel laughed with a sudden clear laugh. ‘Wise the 
Lady Galadriel may be,’ she said, ‘yet here she has met her 
match in courtesy. Gently are you revenged for my testing 
of your heart at our first meeting. You begin to see with a 


476 THE FELLOWSHIP OF THE RING 


keen eye. I do not deny that my heart has greatly desired to 
ask what you offer. For many long years I had pondered what 
I might do, should the Great Ring come into my hands, and 
behold! it was brought within my grasp. The evil that was 
devised long ago works on in many ways, whether Sauron 
himself stands or falls. Would not that have been a noble 
deed to set to the credit of his Ring, if I had taken it by force 
or fear from my guest? 

‘And now at last it comes. You will give me the Ring freely! 
In place of the Dark Lord you will set up a Queen. And I 
shall not be dark, but beautiful and terrible as the Morning 
and the Night! Fair as the Sea and the Sun and the Snow 
upon the Mountain! Dreadful as the Storm and the Light- 
ning! Stronger than the foundations of the earth. All shall 
love me and despair!’ 

She lifted up her hand and from the ring that she wore 
there issued a great light that illumined her alone and left all 
else dark. She stood before Frodo seeming now tall beyond 
measurement, and beautiful beyond enduring, terrible and 
worshipful. Then she let her hand fall, and the light faded, 
and suddenly she laughed again, and lo! she was shrunken: a 
slender elf-woman, clad in simple white, whose gentle voice 
was soft and sad. 

‘I pass the test,’ she said. ‘I will diminish, and go into the 
West, and remain Galadriel.’ 


They stood for a long while in silence. At length the Lady 
spoke again. ‘Let us return!’ she said. ‘In the morning you 
must depart, for now we have chosen, and the tides of fate 
are flowing.’ 

‘I would ask one thing before we go,’ said Frodo, ‘a thing 
which I often meant to ask Gandalf in Rivendell. I am per- 
mitted to wear the One Ring: why cannot J see all the others 
and know the thoughts of those that wear them?’ 

“You have not tried,’ she said. ‘Only thrice have you set 
the Ring upon your finger since you knew what you pos- 
sessed. Do not try! It would destroy you. Did not Gandalf 


THE MIRROR OF GALADRIEL 477 


tell you that the rings give power according to the measure 
of each possessor? Before you could use that power you 
would need to become far stronger, and to train your will to 
the domination of others. Yet even so, as Ring-bearer and as 
one that has borne it on finger and seen that which is hidden, 
your sight is grown keener. You have perceived my thought 
more clearly than many that are accounted wise. You saw 
the Eye of him that holds the Seven and the Nine. And did 
you not see and recognize the ring upon my finger? Did you 
see my ring?’ she asked turning again to Sam. 

‘No, Lady,’ he answered. “To tell you the truth, I wondered 
what you were talking about. I saw a star through your 
fingers. But if youll pardon my speaking out, I think my 
master was right. I wish you’d take his Ring. You’d put things 
to rights. You’d stop them digging up the Gaffer and turning 
him adrift. You’d make some folk pay for their dirty work.’ 

‘TI would,’ she said. “That is how it would begin. But it 
would not stop with that, alas! We will not speak more of it. 
Let us go!’ 


Chapter 8 


FAREWELL TO LORIEN 


That night the Company was again summoned to the 
chamber of Celeborn, and there the Lord and Lady greeted 
them with fair words. At length Celeborn spoke of their 
departure. 

‘Now is the time,’ he said, ‘when those who wish to con- 
tinue the Quest must harden their hearts to leave this land. 
Those who no longer wish to go forward may remain here, 
for a while. But whether they stay or go, none can be sure of 
peace. For we are come now to the edge of doom. Here those 
who wish may await the oncoming of the hour till either the 
ways of the world lie open again, or we summon them to the 
last need of Lorien. Then they may return to their own lands, 
or else go to the long home of those that fall in battle.’ 

There was a silence. “They all resolved to go forward,’ said 
Galadriel looking in their eyes. 

‘As for me,’ said Boromir, ‘my way home lies onward and 
not back.’ 

“That is true,’ said Celeborn, “but is all this Company going 
with you to Minas Tirith?’ 

‘We have not decided our course,’ said Aragorn. ‘Beyond 
Lothlorien I do not know what Gandalf intended to do. 
Indeed I do not think that even he had any clear purpose.’ 

‘Maybe not,’ said Celeborn, ‘yet when you leave this land, 
you can no longer forget the Great River. As some of you 
know well, it cannot be crossed by travellers with baggage 
between Lorien and Gondor, save by boat. And are not the 
bridges of Osgiliath broken down and all the landings held 
now by the Enemy? 

‘On which side will you journey? The way to Minas Tirith 
lies upon this side, upon the west; but the straight road of the 


FAREWELL TO LORIEN 479 


Quest lies east of the River, upon the darker shore. Which 
shore will you now take?’ 

‘If my advice is heeded, it will be the western shore, and 
the way to Minas Tirith,’ answered Boromir. ‘But I am not 
the leader of the Company.’ The others said nothing, and 
Aragorn looked doubtful and troubled. 

‘I see that you do not yet know what to do,’ said Celeborn. 
‘It is not my part to choose for you; but I will help you as I 
may. There are some among you who can handle boats: 
Legolas, whose folk know the swift Forest River; and Boromir 
of Gondor; and Aragorn the traveller.’ 

‘And one Hobbit!’ cried Merry. ‘Not all of us look on 
boats as wild horses. My people live by the banks of the 
Brandywine.’ 

“That is well,’ said Celeborn. “Then I will furnish your 
Company with boats. They must be small and light, for if 
you go far by water, there are places where you will be forced 
to carry them. You will come to the rapids of Sarn Gebir, 
and maybe at last to the great falls of Rauros where the River 
thunders down from Nen Hithoel; and there are other perils. 
Boats may make your journey less toilsome for a while. Yet 
they will not give you counsel: in the end you must leave 
them and the River, and turn west — or east.’ 

Aragorn thanked Celeborn many times. The gift of boats 
comforted him much, not least because there would now be 
no need to decide his course for some days. The others, too, 
looked more hopeful. Whatever perils lay ahead, it seemed 
better to float down the broad tide of Anduin to meet them 
than to plod forward with bent backs. Only Sam was doubt- 
ful: he at any rate still thought boats as bad as wild horses, 
or worse, and not all the dangers that he had survived made 
him think better of them. 

‘All shall be prepared for you and await you at the haven 
before noon tomorrow,’ said Celeborn. ‘I will send my people 
to you in the morning to help you make ready for the journey. 
Now we will wish you all a fair night and untroubled sleep.’ 

‘Good night, my friends!’ said Galadriel. ‘Sleep in peace! 


480 THE FELLOWSHIP OF THE RING 


Do not trouble your hearts overmuch with thought of the 
road tonight. Maybe the paths that you each shall tread are 
already laid before your feet, though you do not see them. 
Good night!’ 


The Company now took their leave and returned to their 
pavilion. Legolas went with them, for this was to be their last 
night in Lothlorien, and in spite of the words of Galadriel 
they wished to take counsel together. 

For a long time they debated what they should do, and 
how it would be best to attempt the fulfilling of their purpose 
with the Ring; but they came to no decision. It was plain that 
most of them desired to go first to Minas Tirith, and to escape 
at least for a while from the terror of the Enemy. They would 
have been willing to follow a leader over the River and 
into the shadow of Mordor; but Frodo spoke no word, and 
Aragorn was still divided in his mind. 

His own plan, while Gandalf remained with them, had 
been to go with Boromir, and with his sword help to deliver 
Gondor. For he believed that the message of the dreams was 
a summons, and that the hour had come at last when the heir 
of Elendil should come forth and strive with Sauron for the 
mastery. But in Moria the burden of Gandalf had been laid 
on him; and he knew that he could not now forsake the Ring, 
if Frodo refused in the end to go with Boromir. And yet what 
help could he or any of the Company give to Frodo, save to 
walk blindly with him into the darkness? 

‘T shall go to Minas Tirith, alone if need be, for it is my 
duty,’ said Boromir; and after that he was silent for a while, 
sitting with his eyes fixed on Frodo, as if he was trying to 
read the Halfling’s thoughts. At length he spoke again, softly, 
as if he was debating with himself. ‘If you wish only to destroy 
the Ring,’ he said, ‘then there is little use in war and weapons; 
and the Men of Minas Tirith cannot help. But if you wish to 
destroy the armed might of the Dark Lord, then it is folly to 
go without force into his domain; and folly to throw away.’ 
He paused suddenly, as if he had become aware that he was 


FAREWELL TO LORIEN 481 


speaking his thoughts aloud. ‘It would be folly to throw lives 
away, I mean,’ he ended. ‘It is a choice between defending a 
strong place and walking openly into the arms of death. At 
least, that is how I see it.’ 

Frodo caught something new and strange in Boromir’s 
glance, and he looked hard at him. Plainly Boromir’s thought 
was different from his final words. It would be folly to throw 
away: what? The Ring of Power? He had said something like 
this at the Council, but then he had accepted the correction 
of Elrond. Frodo looked at Aragorn, but he seemed deep 
in his own thought and made no sign that he had heeded 
Boromir’s words. And so their debate ended. Merry and 
Pippin were already asleep, and Sam was nodding. The night 
was growing old. 


In the morning, as they were beginning to pack their slen- 
der goods, Elves that could speak their tongue came to them 
and brought them many gifts of food and clothing for the 
journey. The food was mostly in the form of very thin cakes, 
made of a meal that was baked a light brown on the outside, 
and inside was the colour of cream. Gimli took up one of the 
cakes and looked at it with a doubtful eye. 

‘Cram,’ he said under his breath, as he broke off a crisp 
corner and nibbled at it. His expression quickly changed, and 
he ate all the rest of the cake with relish. 

‘No more, no more!’ cried the Elves laughing. “You have 
eaten enough already for a long day’s march.’ 

‘T thought it was only a kind of cram, such as the Dale-men 
make for journeys in the wild,’ said the Dwarf. 

‘So it is,’ they answered. ‘But we call it lembas or waybread, 
and it is more strengthening than any food made by Men, 
and it is more pleasant than cram, by all accounts.’ 

‘Indeed it is,’ said Gimli. ‘Why, it is better than the honey- 
cakes of the Beornings, and that is great praise, for the 
Beornings are the best bakers that I know of; but they are 
none too willing to deal out their cakes to travellers in these 
days. You are kindly hosts!’ 


482 THE FELLOWSHIP OF THE RING 


‘All the same, we bid you spare the food,’ they said. ‘Eat 
little at a time, and only at need. For these things are given 
to serve you when all else fails. The cakes will keep sweet 
for many many days, if they are unbroken and left in their 
leaf-wrappings, as we have brought them. One will keep a 
traveller on his feet for a day of long labour, even if he be 
one of the tall Men of Minas Tirith.’ 

The Elves next unwrapped and gave to each of the Com- 
pany the clothes they had brought. For each they had pro- 
vided a hood and cloak, made according to his size, of the 
light but warm silken stuff that the Galadhrim wove. It was 
hard to say of what colour they were: grey with the hue of 
twilight under the trees they seemed to be; and yet if they 
were moved, or set in another light, they were green as 
shadowed leaves, or brown as fallow fields by night, dusk- 
silver as water under the stars. Each cloak was fastened about 
the neck with a brooch like a green leaf veined with silver. 

‘Are these magic cloaks?’ asked Pippin, looking at them 
with wonder. 

‘I do not know what you mean by that,’ answered the 
leader of the Elves. “They are fair garments, and the web is 
good, for it was made in this land. They are Elvish robes 
certainly, if that is what you mean. Leaf and branch, water 
and stone: they have the hue and beauty of all these things 
under the twilight of Lorien that we love; for we put the 
thought of all that we love into all that we make. Yet they are 
garments, not armour, and they will not turn shaft or blade. 
But they should serve you well: they are light to wear, and 
warm enough or cool enough at need. And you will find them 
a great aid in keeping out of the sight of unfriendly eyes, 
whether you walk among the stones or the trees. You are 
indeed high in the favour of the Lady! For she herself and 
her maidens wove this stuff; and never before have we clad 
strangers in the garb of our own people.’ 


After their morning meal the Company said farewell to the 
lawn by the fountain. Their hearts were heavy; for it was a 


FAREWELL TO LORIEN 483 


fair place, and it had become like home to them, though they 
could not count the days and nights that they had passed 
there. As they stood for a moment looking at the white water 
in the sunlight, Haldir came walking towards them over the 
green grass of the glade. Frodo greeted him with delight. 

‘I have returned from the Northern Fences,’ said the EIf, 
‘and I am sent now to be your guide again. The Dimrill Dale 
is full of vapour and clouds of smoke, and the mountains are 
troubled. There are noises in the deeps of the earth. If any 
of you had thought of returning northwards to your homes, 
you would not have been able to pass that way. But come! 
Your path now goes south.’ 

As they walked through Caras Galadhon the green ways 
were empty; but in the trees above them many voices were 
murmuring and singing. They themselves went silently. At 
last Haldir led them down the southward slopes of the hill, 
and they came again to the great gate hung with lamps, and 
to the white bridge; and so they passed out and left the city 
of the Elves. Then they turned away from the paved road 
and took a path that went off into a deep thicket of mallorn- 
trees, and passed on, winding through rolling woodlands of 
silver shadow, leading them ever down, southwards and east- 
wards, towards the shores of the River. 

They had gone some ten miles and noon was at hand 
when they came on a high green wall. Passing through an 
opening they came suddenly out of the trees. Before them 
lay a long lawn of shining grass, studded with golden elanor 
that glinted in the sun. The lawn ran out into a narrow tongue 
between bright margins: on the right and west the Silverlode 
flowed glittering; on the left and east the Great River rolled 
its broad waters, deep and dark. On the further shores the 
woodlands still marched on southwards as far as eye could 
see, but all the banks were bleak and bare. No mallorn lifted 
its gold-hung boughs beyond the Land of Lorien. 

On the bank of the Silverlode, at some distance up from 
the meeting of the streams, there was a hythe of white stones 
and white wood. By it were moored many boats and barges. 


484 THE FELLOWSHIP OF THE RING 


Some were brightly painted, and shone with silver and gold 
and green, but most were either white or grey. Three small 
grey boats had been made ready for the travellers, and in 
these the Elves stowed their goods. And they added also coils 
of rope, three to each boat. Slender they looked, but strong, 
silken to the touch, grey of hue like the elven-cloaks. 

‘What are these?’ asked Sam, handling one that lay upon 
the greensward. 

‘Ropes indeed!’ answered an Elf from the boats. ‘Never 
travel far without a rope! And one that is long and strong and 
light. Such are these. They may be a help in many needs.’ 

“You don’t need to tell me that!’ said Sam. ‘I came without 
any, and I’ve been worried ever since. But I was wondering 
what these were made of, knowing a bit about rope-making: 
it’s in the family as you might say.’ 

“They are made of /uthlain,’ said the Elf, ‘but there is no 
time now to instruct you in the art of their making. Had we 
known that this craft delighted you, we could have taught 
you much. But now alas! unless you should at some time 
return hither, you must be content with our gift. May it serve 
you well!’ 

‘Come!’ said Haldir. ‘All is now ready for you. Enter the 
boats! But take care at first!’ 

‘Heed the words!’ said the other Elves. “These boats are 
light-built, and they are crafty and unlike the boats of other 
folk. They will not sink, lade them as you will; but they are 
wayward if mishandled. It would be wise if you accustomed 
yourselves to stepping in and out, here where there is a 
landing-place, before you set off downstream.’ 


The Company was arranged in this way: Aragorn, Frodo, 
and Sam were in one boat; Boromir, Merry, and Pippin in 
another; and in the third were Legolas and Gimli, who had 
now become fast friends. In this last boat most of the goods 
and packs were stowed. The boats were moved and steered 
with short-handled paddles that had broad leaf-shaped 
blades. When all was ready Aragorn led them on a trial up 


FAREWELL TO LORIEN 485 


the Silverlode. The current was swift and they went forward 
slowly. Sam sat in the bows, clutching the sides, and looking 
back wistfully to the shore. The sunlight glittering on the 
water dazzled his eyes. As they passed beyond the green field 
of the Tongue, the trees drew down to the river’s brink. Here 
and there golden leaves tossed and floated on the rippling 
stream. The air was very bright and still, and there was a 
silence, except for the high distant song of larks. 

They turned a sharp bend in the river, and there, sailing 
proudly down the stream towards them, they saw a swan of 
great size. The water rippled on either side of the white breast 
beneath its curving neck. Its beak shone like burnished gold, 
and its eyes glinted like jet set in yellow stones; its huge white 
wings were half lifted. A music came down the river as it 
drew nearer; and suddenly they perceived that it was a ship, 
wrought and carved with elven-skill in the likeness of a bird. 
Two elves clad in white steered it with black paddles. In 
the midst of the vessel sat Celeborn, and behind him stood 
Galadriel, tall and white; a circlet of golden flowers was in 
her hair, and in her hand she held a harp, and she sang. Sad 
and sweet was the sound of her voice in the cool clear air: 


I sang of leaves, of leaves of gold, and leaves of gold there 
grew: 

Of wind I sang, a wind there came and in the branches blew. 

Beyond the Sun, beyond the Moon, the foam was on the Sea, 

And by the strand of Ilmarin there grew a golden Tree. 

Beneath the stars of Ever-eve in Eldamar it shone, 

In Eldamar beside the walls of Elven Tirion. 

There long the golden leaves have grown upon the branching 
years, 

While here beyond the Sundering Seas now fall the Elven- 
tears. 

O Lérien! The Winter comes, the bare and leafless Day; 

The leaves are falling in the stream, the River flows away. 

O Lorien! Too long I have dwelt upon this Hither Shore 

And in a fading crown have twined the golden elanor. 


486 THE FELLOWSHIP OF THE RING 


But tf of ships I now should sing, what ship would come to 
me, 
What ship would bear me ever back across so wide a Sea? 


Aragorn stayed his boat as the Swan-ship drew alongside. 
The Lady ended her song and greeted them. ‘We have come 
to bid our last farewell,’ she said, ‘and to speed you with 
blessings from our land.’ 

“Though you have been our guests,’ said Celeborn, ‘you 
have not yet eaten with us, and we bid you, therefore, to a 
parting feast, here between the flowing waters that will bear 
you far from Lorien.’ 

The Swan passed on slowly to the hythe, and they turned 
their boats and followed it. There in the last end of Egladil 
upon the green grass the parting feast was held; but Frodo 
ate and drank little, heeding only the beauty of the Lady and 
her voice. She seemed no longer perilous or terrible, nor filled 
with hidden power. Already she seemed to him, as by men 
of later days Elves still at times are seen: present and yet 
remote, a living vision of that which has already been left far 
behind by the flowing streams of Time. 


After they had eaten and drunk, sitting upon the grass, 
Celeborn spoke to them again of their journey, and lifting his 
hand he pointed south to the woods beyond the Tongue. 

‘As you go down the water,’ he said, ‘you will find that the 
trees will fail, and you will come to a barren country. There 
the River flows in stony vales amid high moors, until at last 
after many leagues it comes to the tall island of the Tindrock, 
that we call Tol Brandir. There it casts its arms about the 
steep shores of the isle, and falls then with a great noise and 
smoke over the cataracts of Rauros down into the Nindalf, 
the Wetwang as it is called in your tongue. That is a wide 
region of sluggish fen where the stream becomes tortuous 
and much divided. There the Entwash flows in by many 
mouths from the Forest of Fangorn in the west. About that 
stream, on this side of the Great River, lies Rohan. On the 


FAREWELL TO LORIEN 487 


further side are the bleak hills of the Emyn Muil. The wind 
blows from the East there, for they look out over the Dead 
Marshes and the Noman-lands to Cirith Gorgor and the 
black gates of Mordor. 

‘Boromir, and any that go with him seeking Minas ‘Tirith, 
will do well to leave the Great River above Rauros and cross 
the Entwash before it finds the marshes. Yet they should not 
go too far up that stream, nor risk becoming entangled in the 
Forest of Fangorn. That is a strange land, and is now little 
known. But Boromir and Aragorn doubtless do not need this 
warning.’ 

‘Indeed we have heard of Fangorn in Minas Tirith,’ said 
Boromir. ‘But what I have heard seems to me for the most 
part old wives’ tales, such as we tell to our children. All that 
lies north of Rohan is now to us so far away that fancy can 
wander freely there. Of old Fangorn lay upon the borders of 
our realm; but it is now many lives of men since any of us 
visited it, to prove or disprove the legends that have come 
down from distant years. 

‘I have myself been at whiles in Rohan, but I have never 
crossed it northwards. When I was sent out as a messenger, 
I passed through the Gap by the skirts of the White Moun- 
tains, and crossed the Isen and the Greyflood into Norther- 
land. A long and wearisome journey. Four hundred leagues 
I reckoned it, and it took me many months; for I lost my 
horse at Tharbad, at the fording of the Greyflood. After that 
journey, and the road I have trodden with this Company, I 
do not much doubt that I shall find a way through Rohan, 
and Fangorn too, if need be.’ 

“Then I need say no more,’ said Celeborn. ‘But do not 
despise the lore that has come down from distant years; for 
oft it may chance that old wives keep in memory word of 
things that once were needful for the wise to know.’ 


Now Galadriel rose from the grass, and taking a cup from 
one of her maidens she filled it with white mead and gave it 
to Celeborn. 


488 THE FELLOWSHIP OF THE RING 


‘Now it is time to drink the cup of farewell,’ she said. 
‘Drink, Lord of the Galadhrim! And let not your heart be 
sad, though night must follow noon, and already our evening 
draweth nigh.’ 

Then she brought the cup to each of the Company, and 
bade them drink and farewell. But when they had drunk she 
commanded them to sit again on the grass, and chairs were 
set for her and for Celeborn. Her maidens stood silent about 
her, and a while she looked upon her guests. At last she spoke 
again. 

‘We have drunk the cup of parting,’ she said, ‘and the 
shadows fall between us. But before you go, I have brought 
in my ship gifts which the Lord and Lady of the Galadhrim 
now offer you in memory of Lothlorien.’ Then she called to 
each in turn. 

‘Here is the gift of Celeborn and Galadriel to the leader of 
your Company,’ she said to Aragorn, and she gave him a 
sheath that had been made to fit his sword. It was overlaid 
with a tracery of flowers and leaves wrought of silver and 
gold, and on it were set in elven-runes formed of many gems 
the name Anduril and the lineage of the sword. 

“The blade that is drawn from this sheath shall not be 
stained or broken even in defeat,’ she said. “But is there aught 
else that you desire of me at our parting? For darkness will 
flow between us, and it may be that we shall not meet again, 
unless it be far hence upon a road that has no returning.’ 

And Aragorn answered: ‘Lady, you know all my desire, 
and long held in keeping the only treasure that I seek. Yet it 
is not yours to give me, even if you would; and only through 
darkness shall I come to it.’ 

“Yet maybe this will lighten your heart,’ said Galadriel; ‘for 
it was left in my care to be given to you, should you pass 
through this land.’ Then she lifted from her lap a great stone 
of a clear green, set in a silver brooch that was wrought in 
the likeness of an eagle with outspread wings; and as she held 
it up the gem flashed like the sun shining through the leaves 
of spring. “This stone I gave to Celebrian my daughter, and 


FAREWELL TO LORIEN 489 


she to hers; and now it comes to you as a token of hope. In 
this hour take the name that was foretold for you, Elessar, 
the Elfstone of the House of Elendil!’ 

Then Aragorn took the stone and pinned the brooch upon 
his breast, and those who saw him wondered; for they had 
not marked before how tall and kingly he stood, and it seemed 
to them that many years of toil had fallen from his shoulders. 
‘For the gifts that you have given me I thank you,’ he said, 
‘O Lady of Lorien of whom were sprung Celebrian and 
Arwen Evenstar. What praise could I say more?’ 

The Lady bowed her head, and she turned then to Boro- 
mir, and to him she gave a belt of gold; and to Merry and 
Pippin she gave small silver belts, each with a clasp wrought 
like a golden flower. To Legolas she gave a bow such as 
the Galadhrim used, longer and stouter than the bows of 
Mirkwood, and strung with a string of elf-hair. With it went 
a quiver of arrows. 

‘For you little gardener and lover of trees,’ she said to Sam, 
‘T have only a small gift.’ She put into his hand a little box of 
plain grey wood, unadorned save for a single silver rune upon 
the lid. ‘Here is set G for Galadriel,’ she said; “but also it may 
stand for garden in your tongue. In this box there is earth 
from my orchard, and such blessing as Galadriel has still to 
bestow is upon it. It will not keep you on your road, nor 
defend you against any peril; but if you keep it and see your 
home again at last, then perhaps it may reward you. Though 
you should find all barren and laid waste, there will be few 
gardens in Middle-earth that will bloom like your garden, 
if you sprinkle this earth there. Then you may remember 
Galadriel, and catch a glimpse far off of Lorien, that you 
have seen only in our winter. For our Spring and our Summer 
are gone by, and they will never be seen on earth again save 
in memory.’ 

Sam went red to the ears and muttered something inaud- 
ible, as he clutched the box and bowed as well as he could. 

‘And what gift would a Dwarf ask of the Elves?’ said 
Galadriel, turning to Gimli. 


490 THE FELLOWSHIP OF THE RING 


‘None, Lady,’ answered Gimli. ‘It is enough for me to have 
seen the Lady of the Galadhrim, and to have heard her gentle 
words.’ 

‘Hear all ye Elves!’ she cried to those about her. ‘Let none 
say again that Dwarves are grasping and ungracious! Yet 
surely, Gimli son of Gloin, you desire something that I could 
give? Name it, I bid you! You shall not be the only guest 
without a gift.’ 

“There is nothing, Lady Galadriel,’ said Gimli, bowing low 
and stammering. ‘Nothing, unless it might be — unless it is 
permitted to ask, nay, to name a single strand of your hair, 
which surpasses the gold of the earth as the stars surpass the 
gems of the mine. I do not ask for such a gift. But you 
commanded me to name my desire.’ 

The Elves stirred and murmured with astonishment, and 
Celeborn gazed at the Dwarf in wonder, but the Lady smiled. 
‘It is said that the skill of the Dwarves is in their hands rather 
than in their tongues,’ she said; ‘yet that is not true of Gimli. 
For none have ever made to me a request so bold and yet so 
courteous. And how shall I refuse, since I commanded him 
to speak? But tell me, what would you do with such a gift?’ 

“Treasure it, Lady,’ he answered, ‘in memory of your 
words to me at our first meeting. And if ever I return to the 
smithies of my home, it shall be set in imperishable crystal 
to be an heirloom of my house, and a pledge of good will 
between the Mountain and the Wood until the end of 
days.’ 

Then the Lady unbraided one of her long tresses, and cut 
off three golden hairs, and laid them in Gimli’s hand. “These 
words shall go with the gift,’ she said. ‘I do not foretell, for 
all foretelling is now vain: on the one hand lies darkness, and 
on the other only hope. But if hope should not fail, then I 
say to you, Gimli son of Gloin, that your hands shall flow 
with gold, and yet over you gold shall have no dominion. 

‘And you, Ring-bearer,’ she said, turning to Frodo. ‘I come 
to you last who are not last in my thoughts. For you I have 
prepared this.’ She held up a small crystal phial: it glittered 


FAREWELL TO LORIEN 491 


as she moved it, and rays of white light sprang from her hand. 
‘In this phial,’ she said, ‘is caught the light of Earendil’s star, 
set amid the waters of my fountain. It will shine still brighter 
when night is about you. May it be a light to you in dark 
places, when all other lights go out. Remember Galadriel and 
her Mirror!’ 

Frodo took the phial, and for a moment as it shone between 
them, he saw her again standing like a queen, great and 
beautiful, but no longer terrible. He bowed, but found no 
words to say. 


Now the Lady arose, and Celeborn led them back to the 
hythe. A yellow noon lay on the green land of the Tongue, 
and the water glittered with silver. All at last was made ready. 
The Company took their places in the boats as before. Crying 
farewell, the Elves of Lorien with long grey poles thrust them 
out into the flowing stream, and the rippling waters bore 
them slowly away. The travellers sat still without moving or 
speaking. On the green bank near to the very point of the 
‘Tongue the Lady Galadriel stood alone and silent. As they 
passed her they turned and their eyes watched her slowly 
floating away from them. For so it seemed to them: Lorien 
was slipping backward, like a bright ship masted with 
enchanted trees, sailing on to forgotten shores, while they sat 
helpless upon the margin of the grey and leafless world. 

Even as they gazed, the Silverlode passed out into the 
currents of the Great River, and their boats turned and began 
to speed southward. Soon the white form of the Lady was 
small and distant. She shone like a window of glass upon a 
far hill in the westering sun, or as a remote lake seen from a 
mountain: a crystal fallen in the lap of the land. Then it 
seemed to Frodo that she lifted her arms in a final farewell, 
and far but piercing-clear on the following wind came the 
sound of her voice singing. But now she sang in the ancient 
tongue of the Elves beyond the Sea, and he did not under- 
stand the words: fair was the music, but it did not comfort 
him. 


492 THE FELLOWSHIP OF THE RING 


Yet as is the way of Elvish words, they remained graven in 
his memory, and long afterwards he interpreted them, as well 
as he could: the language was that of Elven-song and spoke 
of things little known on Middle-earth. 


Ai! laurié lantar lassi stirinen, 
yen unotimé ve ramar aldaron! 
Yént ve linté yuldar avanier 

mt oromardi lisse-miruvoreva 
Anduné pella, Vardo tellumar 
nu luini yassen tintilar 1 elent 
omaryo atretari-lirinen. 


Si man i yulma nin enquantuva? 


An si Tintallé Varda Oiolosséo 

ve fanyar maryat Elentari ortané, 

ar ilyé tier undulavé lumbulé; 

ar sindanoriello caita mornié 

1 falmalinnar imbé met, ar hisié 

untupa Calaciryo miri otalé. 

Si vanwa na, Romello vanwa, Valimar! 


Namané! Nai hiruvalyé Valimar. 
Nai elyé hiruva. Namarié! 


‘Ah! like gold fall the leaves in the wind, long years number- 
less as the wings of trees! The years have passed like swift 
draughts of the sweet mead in lofty halls beyond the West, 
beneath the blue vaults of Varda wherein the stars tremble 
in the song of her voice, holy and queenly. Who now shall 
refill the cup for me? For now the Kindler, Varda, the Queen 
of the Stars, from Mount Everwhite has uplifted her hands 
like clouds, and all paths are drowned deep in shadow; and 
out of a grey country darkness lies on the foaming waves 
between us, and mist covers the jewels of Calacirya for ever. 
Now lost, lost to those from the East is Valimar! Farewell! 


FAREWELL TO LORIEN 493 


Maybe thou shalt find Valimar. Maybe even thou shalt find 
it. Farewell!’ Varda is the name of that Lady whom the Elves 
in these lands of exile name Elbereth. 


Suddenly the River swept round a bend, and the banks 
rose upon either side, and the light of Lorien was hidden. To 
that fair land Frodo never came again. 

The travellers now turned their faces to the journey; the 
sun was before them, and their eyes were dazzled, for all were 
filled with tears. Gimli wept openly. 

‘T have looked the last upon that which was fairest,’ he said 
to Legolas his companion. ‘Henceforward I will call nothing 
fair, unless it be her gift.’ He put his hand to his breast. 

“Tell me, Legolas, why did I come on this Quest? Little 
did I know where the chief peril lay! Truly Elrond spoke, 
saying that we could not foresee what we might meet upon 
our road. Torment in the dark was the danger that I feared, 
and it did not hold me back. But I would not have come, had 
I known the danger of light and joy. Now I have taken my 
worst wound in this parting, even if I were to go this night 
straight to the Dark Lord. Alas for Gimli son of Gldéin!’ 

‘Nay!’ said Legolas. ‘Alas for us all! And for all that walk 
the world in these after-days. For such is the way of it: to 
find and lose, as it seems to those whose boat is on the 
running stream. But I count you blessed, Gimli son of Gloin: 
for your loss you suffer of your own free will, and you might 
have chosen otherwise. But you have not forsaken your com- 
panions, and the least reward that you shall have is that the 
memory of Lothlorien shall remain ever clear and unstained 
in your heart, and shall neither fade nor grow stale.’ 

‘Maybe,’ said Gimli; ‘and I thank you for your words. True 
words doubtless; yet all such comfort is cold. Memory is not 
what the heart desires. That is only a mirror, be it clear as 
Kheled-zaram. Or so says the heart of Gimli the Dwarf. Elves 
may see things otherwise. Indeed I have heard that for them 
memory is more like to the waking world than to a dream. 
Not so for Dwarves. 


494 THE FELLOWSHIP OF THE RING 


‘But let us talk no more of it. Look to the boat! She is too 
low in the water with all this baggage, and the Great River is 
swift. I do not wish to drown my grief in cold water.’ He took 
up a paddle, and steered towards the western bank, following 
Aragorn’s boat ahead, which had already moved out of the 
middle stream. 


So the Company went on their long way, down the wide 
hurrying waters, borne ever southwards. Bare woods stalked 
along either bank, and they could not see any glimpse of the 
lands behind. The breeze died away and the River flowed 
without a sound. No voice of bird broke the silence. The sun 
grew misty as the day grew old, until it gleamed in a pale sky 
like a high white pearl. Then it faded into the West, and dusk 
came early, followed by a grey and starless night. Far into 
the dark quiet hours they floated on, guiding their boats under 
the overhanging shadows of the western woods. Great trees 
passed by like ghosts, thrusting their twisted thirsty roots 
through the mist down into the water. It was dreary and cold. 
Frodo sat and listened to the faint lap and gurgle of the River 
fretting among the tree-roots and driftwood near the shore, 
until his head nodded and he fell into an uneasy sleep. 


Chapter 9 


‘THE GREAT RIVER 


Frodo was roused by Sam. He found that he was lying, well 
wrapped, under tall grey-skinned trees in a quiet corner of 
the woodlands on the west bank of the Great River, Anduin. 
He had slept the night away, and the grey of morning was 
dim among the bare branches. Gimli was busy with a small 
fire near at hand. 

They started again before the day was broad. Not that 
most of the Company were eager to hurry southwards: they 
were content that the decision, which they must make at latest 
when they came to Rauros and the Tindrock Isle, still lay 
some days ahead; and they let the River bear them on at its 
own pace, having no desire to hasten towards the perils that 
lay beyond, whichever course they took in the end. Aragorn 
let them drift with the stream as they wished, husbanding 
their strength against weariness to come. But he insisted that 
at least they should start early each day and journey on far 
into the evening; for he felt in his heart that time was pressing, 
and he feared that the Dark Lord had not been idle while 
they lingered in Lorien. 

Nonetheless they saw no sign of any enemy that day, nor 
the next. The dull grey hours passed without event. As the 
third day of their voyage wore on the lands changed slowly: 
the trees thinned and then failed altogether. On the eastern 
bank to their left they saw long formless slopes stretching up 
and away towards the sky; brown and withered they looked, 
as if fire had passed over them, leaving no living blade of 
green: an unfriendly waste without even a broken tree or a 
bold stone to relieve the emptiness. They had come to the 
Brown Lands that lay, vast and desolate, between Southern 
Mirkwood and the hills of the Emyn Muil. What pestilence 


496 THE FELLOWSHIP OF THE RING 


or war or evil deed of the Enemy had so blasted all that region 
even Aragorn could not tell. 

Upon the west to their right the land was treeless also, but 
it was flat, and in many places green with wide plains of 
grass. On this side of the River they passed forests of great 
reeds, so tall that they shut out all view to the west, as the 
little boats went rustling by along their fluttering borders. 
Their dark withered plumes bent and tossed in the light cold 
airs, hissing softly and sadly. Here and there through open- 
ings Frodo could catch sudden glimpses of rolling meads, 
and far beyond them hills in the sunset, and away on the 
edge of sight a dark line, where marched the southernmost 
ranks of the Misty Mountains. 

There was no sign of living moving things, save birds. Of 
these there were many: small fowl whistling and piping in the 
reeds, but they were seldom seen. Once or twice the travellers 
heard the rush and whine of swan-wings, and looking up they 
saw a great phalanx streaming along the sky. 

‘Swans!’ said Sam. ‘And mighty big ones too!’ 

‘Yes,’ said Aragorn, ‘and they are black swans.’ 

‘How wide and empty and mournful all this country looks!’ 
said Frodo. ‘I always imagined that as one journeyed south 
it got warmer and merrier, until winter was left behind for 
ever.’ 

‘But we have not journeyed far south yet,’ answered 
Aragorn. ‘It is still winter, and we are far from the sea. Here 
the world is cold until the sudden spring, and we may yet 
have snow again. Far away down in the Bay of Belfalas, to 
which Anduin runs, it is warm and merry, maybe, or would 
be but for the Enemy. But here we are not above sixty leagues, 
I guess, south of the Southfarthing away in your Shire, hun- 
dreds of long miles yonder. You are looking now south-west 
across the north plains of the Riddermark, Rohan the land of 
the Horse-lords. Ere long we shall come to the mouth of the 
Limlight that runs down from Fangorn to join the Great 
River. That is the north boundary of Rohan; and of old all 
that lay between Limlight and the White Mountains belonged 


THE GREAT RIVER 497 


to the Rohirrim. It is a rich and pleasant land, and its grass 
has no rival; but in these evil days folk do not dwell by the 
River or ride often to its shores. Anduin is wide, yet the orcs 
can shoot their arrows far across the stream; and of late, it is 
said, they have dared to cross the water and raid the herds 
and studs of Rohan.’ 

Sam looked from bank to bank uneasily. The trees had 
seemed hostile before, as if they harboured secret eyes and 
lurking dangers; now he wished that the trees were still there. 
He felt that the Company was too naked, afloat in little open 
boats in the midst of shelterless lands, and on a river that was 
the frontier of war. 

In the next day or two, as they went on, borne steadily 
southwards, this feeling of insecurity grew on all the Com- 
pany. For a whole day they took to their paddles and hastened 
forward. The banks slid by. Soon the River broadened and 
grew more shallow; long stony beaches lay upon the east, and 
there were gravel-shoals in the water, so that careful steering 
was needed. The Brown Lands rose into bleak wolds, over 
which flowed a chill air from the East. On the other side the 
meads had become rolling downs of withered grass amidst a 
land of fen and tussock. Frodo shivered, thinking of the lawns 
and fountains, the clear sun and gentle rains of Lothlorien. 
There was little speech and no laughter in any of the boats. 
Each member of the Company was busy with his own 
thoughts. 

The heart of Legolas was running under the stars of a 
summer night in some northern glade amid the beech-woods; 
Gimli was fingering gold in his mind, and wondering if it 
were fit to be wrought into the housing of the Lady’s gift. 
Merry and Pippin in the middle boat were ill at ease, for 
Boromir sat muttering to himself, sometimes biting his nails, 
as if some restlessness or doubt consumed him, sometimes 
seizing a paddle and driving the boat close behind Aragorn’s. 
Then Pippin, who sat in the bow looking back, caught a 
queer gleam in his eye, as he peered forward gazing at Frodo. 
Sam had long ago made up his mind that, though boats were 


498 THE FELLOWSHIP OF THE RING 


maybe not as dangerous as he had been brought up to believe, 
they were far more uncomfortable than even he had imag- 
ined. He was cramped and miserable, having nothing to do 
but stare at the winter-lands crawling by and the grey water 
on either side of him. Even when the paddles were in use 
they did not trust Sam with one. 

As dusk drew down on the fourth day, he was looking 
back over the bowed heads of Frodo and Aragorn and the 
following boats; he was drowsy and longed for camp and the 
feel of earth under his toes. Suddenly something caught his 
sight: at first he stared at it listlessly, then he sat up and 
rubbed his eyes; but when he looked again he could not see 
it any more. 


That night they camped on a small eyot close to the western 
bank. Sam lay rolled in blankets beside Frodo. ‘I had a funny 
dream an hour or two before we stopped, Mr. Frodo,’ he 
said. ‘Or maybe it wasn’t a dream. Funny it was anyway.’ 

‘Well, what was it?’ said Frodo, knowing that Sam would 
not settle down until he had told his tale, whatever it was. ‘I 
haven’t seen or thought of anything to make me smile since 
we left Lothlorien.’ 

‘Tt wasn’t funny that way, Mr. Frodo. It was queer. All 
wrong, if it wasn’t a dream. And you had best hear it. It was 
like this: I saw a log with eyes!’ 

“The log’s all right,’ said Frodo. “There are many in the 
River. But leave out the eyes!’ 

“That I won’t,’ said Sam. ‘Twas the eyes as made me sit 
up, so to speak. I saw what I took to be a log floating along 
in the half-light behind Gimli’s boat; but I didn’t give much 
heed to it. Then it seemed as if the log was slowly catching 
us up. And that was peculiar, as you might say, seeing as we 
were all floating on the stream together. Just then I saw the 
eyes: two pale sort of points, shiny-like, on a hump at the 
near end of the log. What’s more, it wasn’t a log, for it had 
paddle-feet, like a swan’s almost, only they seemed bigger, 
and kept dipping in and out of the water. 


THE GREAT RIVER 499 


“That’s when I sat right up and rubbed my eyes, meaning 
to give a shout, if it was still there when I had rubbed the 
drowse out of my head. For the whatever-it-was was coming 
along fast now and getting close behind Gimli. But whether 
those two lamps spotted me moving and staring, or whether 
I came to my senses, I don’t know. When I looked again, it 
wasn’t there. Yet I think I caught a glimpse, with the tail of 
my eye, as the saying is, of something dark shooting under 
the shadow of the bank. I couldn’t see no more eyes, though. 

‘T said to myself: “dreaming again, Sam Gamgee,”’ I said; 
and I said no more just then. But I’ve been thinking since, 
and now I’m not so sure. What do you make of it, Mr. 
Frodo?’ 

‘I should make nothing of it but a log and the dusk and 
sleep in your eyes, Sam,’ said Frodo, ‘if this was the first time 
that those eyes had been seen. But it isn’t. I saw them away 
back north before we reached Lorien. And I saw a strange 
creature with eyes climbing to the flet that night. Haldir saw 
it too. And do you remember the report of the Elves that 
went after the orc-band?’ 

‘Ah,’ said Sam, ‘I do; and I remember more too. I don’t 
like my thoughts; but thinking of one thing and another, and 
Mr. Bilbo’s stories and all, I fancy I could put a name on the 
creature, at a guess. A nasty name. Gollum, maybe?’ 

“Yes, that is what I have feared for some time,’ said Frodo. 
‘Ever since the night on the flet. I suppose he was lurking in 
Moria, and picked up our trail then; but I hoped that our 
stay in Lorien would throw him off the scent again. The 
miserable creature must have been hiding in the woods by 
the Silverlode, watching us start off!’ 

“That’s about it,’ said Sam. ‘And we’d better be a bit more 
watchful ourselves, or we'll feel some nasty fingers round our 
necks one of these nights, if we ever wake up to feel anything. 
And that’s what I was leading up to. No need to trouble 
Strider or the others tonight. I'll keep watch. I can sleep 
tomorrow, being no more than luggage in a boat, as you 
might say.’ 


500 THE FELLOWSHIP OF THE RING 


‘T might,’ said Frodo, ‘and I might say “luggage with eyes’. 
You shall watch; but only if you promise to wake me half-way 
towards morning, if nothing happens before then.’ 


In the dead hours Frodo came out of a deep dark sleep to 
find Sam shaking him. ‘It’s a shame to wake you,’ whispered 
Sam, ‘but that’s what you said. There’s nothing to tell, or not 
much. I thought I heard some soft plashing and a sniffing 
noise, a while back; but you hear a lot of such queer sounds 
by a river at night.’ 

He lay down, and Frodo sat up, huddled in his blankets, 
and fought off his sleep. Minutes or hours passed slowly, and 
nothing happened. Frodo was just yielding to the temptation 
to lie down again when a dark shape, hardly visible, floated 
close to one of the moored boats. A long whitish hand could 
be dimly seen as it shot out and grabbed the gunwale; two 
pale lamplike eyes shone coldly as they peered inside, and 
then they lifted and gazed up at Frodo on the eyot. They 
were not more than a yard or two away, and Frodo heard the 
soft hiss of intaken breath. He stood up, drawing Sting from 
its sheath, and faced the eyes. Immediately their light was 
shut off. There was another hiss and a splash, and the dark 
log-shape shot away downstream into the night. Aragorn 
stirred in his sleep, turned over, and sat up. 

‘What is it?’ he whispered, springing up and coming to 
Frodo. ‘I felt something in my sleep. Why have you drawn 
your sword?’ 

‘Gollum,’ answered Frodo. ‘Or at least, so I guess.’ 

‘Ah!’ said Aragorn. ‘So you know about our little footpad, 
do you? He padded after us all through Moria and right down 
to Nimrodel. Since we took to boats, he has been lying on a 
log and paddling with hands and feet. I have tried to catch 
him once or twice at night; but he is slier than a fox, and as 
slippery as a fish. I hoped the river-voyage would beat him, 
but he is too clever a waterman. 

‘We shall have to try going faster tomorrow. You lie down 
now, and I will keep watch for what is left of the night. I wish 


THE GREAT RIVER SOI 


I could lay my hands on the wretch. We might make him 
useful. But if I cannot, we shall have to try and lose him. He 
is very dangerous. Quite apart from murder by night on his 
own account, he may put any enemy that is about on our 
track.’ 


The night passed without Gollum showing so much as a 
shadow again. After that the Company kept a sharp look-out, 
but they saw no more of Gollum while the voyage lasted. If 
he was still following, he was very wary and cunning. At 
Aragorn’s bidding they paddled now for long spells, and the 
banks went swiftly by. But they saw little of the country, for 
they journeyed mostly by night and twilight, resting by day, 
and lying as hidden as the land allowed. In this way the time 
passed without event until the seventh day. 

The weather was still grey and overcast, with wind from the 
East, but as evening drew into night the sky away westward 
cleared, and pools of faint light, yellow and pale green, 
opened under the grey shores of cloud. There the white rind 
of the new Moon could be seen glimmering in the remote 
lakes. Sam looked at it and puckered his brows. 

The next day the country on either side began to change 
rapidly. The banks began to rise and grow stony. Soon they 
were passing through a hilly rocky land, and on both shores 
there were steep slopes buried in deep brakes of thorn and 
sloe, tangled with brambles and creepers. Behind them stood 
low crumbling cliffs, and chimneys of grey weathered stone 
dark with ivy; and beyond these again there rose high ridges 
crowned with wind-writhen firs. They were drawing near to 
the grey hill-country of the Emyn Muil, the southern march 
of Wilderland. 

There were many birds about the cliffs and the rock- 
chimneys, and all day high in the air flocks of birds had been 
circling, black against the pale sky. As they lay in their camp 
that day Aragorn watched the flights doubtfully, wondering 
if Gollum had been doing some mischief and the news of 
their voyage was now moving in the wilderness. Later as the 


502 THE FELLOWSHIP OF THE RING 


sun was setting, and the Company was stirring and getting 
ready to start again, he descried a dark spot against the fading 
light: a great bird high and far off, now wheeling, now flying 
on slowly southwards. 

‘What is that, Legolas?’ he asked, pointing to the northern 
sky. ‘Is it, as I think, an eagle?’ 

‘Yes,’ said Legolas. ‘It is an eagle, a hunting eagle. I wonder 
what that forebodes. It is far from the mountains.’ 

‘We will not start until it is fully dark,’ said Aragorn. 


The eighth night of their journey came. It was silent and 
windless; the grey east wind had passed away. The thin cres- 
cent of the Moon had fallen early into the pale sunset, but 
the sky was clear above, and though far away in the South 
there were great ranges of cloud that still shone faintly, in the 
West stars glinted bright. 

‘Come!’ said Aragorn. ‘We will venture one more journey 
by night. We are coming to reaches of the River that I do not 
know well; for I have never journeyed by water in these parts 
before, not between here and the rapids of Sarn Gebir. But 
if I am right in my reckoning, those are still many miles 
ahead. Still there are dangerous places even before we come 
there: rocks and stony eyots in the stream. We must keep a 
sharp watch and not try to paddle swiftly.’ 

To Sam in the leading boat was given the task of watch- 
man. He lay forward peering into the gloom. The night grew 
dark, but the stars above were strangely bright, and there was 
a glimmer on the face of the River. It was close on midnight, 
and they had been drifting for some while, hardly using the 
paddles, when suddenly Sam cried out. Only a few yards 
ahead dark shapes loomed up in the stream and he heard the 
swirl of racing water. There was a swift current which swung 
left, towards the eastern shore where the channel was clear. 
As they were swept aside the travellers could see, now very 
close, the pale foam of the River lashing against sharp rocks 
that were thrust out far into the stream like a ridge of teeth. 
The boats were all huddled together. 


THE GREAT RIVER 503 


‘Hoy there, Aragorn!’ shouted Boromir, as his boat 
bumped into the leader. “This is madness! We cannot dare 
the Rapids by night! But no boat can live in Sarn Gebir, be 
it night or day.’ 

‘Back, back!’ cried Aragorn. “Turn! Turn if you can!’ He 
drove his paddle into the water, trying to hold the boat and 
bring it round. 

‘IT am out of my reckoning,’ he said to Frodo. ‘I did not 
know that we had come so far: Anduin flows faster than I 
thought. Sarn Gebir must be close at hand already.’ 


With great efforts they checked the boats and slowly 
brought them about; but at first they could make only small 
headway against the current, and all the time they were 
carried nearer and nearer to the eastern bank. Now dark and 
ominous it loomed up in the night. 

‘All together, paddle!’ shouted Boromir. ‘Paddle! Or we 
shall be driven on the shoals.’ Even as he spoke Frodo felt 
the keel beneath him grate upon stone. 

At that moment there was a twang of bowstrings: several 
arrows whistled over them, and some fell among them. One 
smote Frodo between the shoulders and he lurched forward 
with a cry, letting go his paddle: but the arrow fell back, 
foiled by his hidden coat of mail. Another passed through 
Aragorn’s hood; and a third stood fast in the gunwale of the 
second boat, close by Merry’s hand. Sam thought he could 
glimpse black figures running to and fro upon the long 
shingle-banks that lay under the eastern shore. They seemed 
very near. 

‘Yrch!’ said Legolas, falling into his own tongue. 

‘Orcs!’ cried Gimli. 

‘Gollum’s doing, [Il be bound,’ said Sam to Frodo. ‘And 
a nice place to choose, too. The River seems set on taking us 
right into their arms!’ 

They all leaned forward straining at the paddles: even Sam 
took a hand. Every moment they expected to feel the bite of 
black-feathered arrows. Many whined overhead or struck the 


504 THE FELLOWSHIP OF THE RING 


water nearby; but there were no more hits. It was dark, but 
not too dark for the night-eyes of Orcs, and in the star- 
glimmer they must have offered their cunning foes some 
mark, unless it was that the grey cloaks of Lorien and the 
grey timber of the elf-wrought boats defeated the malice of 
the archers of Mordor. 

Stroke by stroke they laboured on. In the darkness it was 
hard to be sure that they were indeed moving at all; but slowly 
the swirl of the water grew less, and the shadow of the eastern 
bank faded back into the night. At last, as far as they could 
judge, they had reached the middle of the stream again and 
had driven their boats back some distance above the jutting 
rocks. Then half turning they thrust them with all their 
strength towards the western shore. Under the shadow of 
bushes leaning out over the water they halted and drew 
breath. 

Legolas laid down his paddle and took up the bow that he 
had brought from Lorien. Then he sprang ashore and 
climbed a few paces up the bank. Stringing the bow and 
fitting an arrow he turned, peering back over the River into 
the darkness. Across the water there were shrill cries, but 
nothing could be seen. 

Frodo looked up at the Elf standing tall above him, as he 
gazed into the night, seeking a mark to shoot at. His head 
was dark, crowned with sharp white stars that glittered in the 
black pools of the sky behind. But now rising and sailing up 
from the South the great clouds advanced, sending out dark 
outriders into the starry fields. A sudden dread fell on the 
Company. 

‘Elbereth Gilthoniel!’ sighed Legolas as he looked up. Even 
as he did so, a dark shape, like a cloud and yet not a cloud, 
for it moved far more swiftly, came out of the blackness in 
the South, and sped towards the Company, blotting out all 
light as it approached. Soon it appeared as a great winged 
creature, blacker than the pits in the night. Fierce voices rose 
up to greet it from across the water. Frodo felt a sudden chill 
running through him and clutching at his heart; there was a 


THE GREAT RIVER 505 


deadly cold, like the memory of an old wound, in his shoulder. 
He crouched down, as if to hide. 

Suddenly the great bow of Lorien sang. Shrill went the 
arrow from the elven-string. Frodo looked up. Almost above 
him the winged shape swerved. There was a harsh croaking 
scream, as it fell out of the air, vanishing down into the gloom 
of the eastern shore. The sky was clean again. There was a 
tumult of many voices far away, cursing and wailing in the 
darkness, and then silence. Neither shaft nor cry came again 
from the east that night. 


After a while Aragorn led the boats back upstream. They 
felt their way along the water’s edge for some distance, until 
they found a small shallow bay. A few low trees grew there 
close to the water, and behind them rose a steep rocky bank. 
Here the Company decided to stay and await the dawn: it 
was useless to attempt to move further by night. They made 
no camp and lit no fire, but lay huddled in the boats, moored 
close together. 

‘Praised be the bow of Galadriel, and the hand and eye of 
Legolas!’ said Gimli, as he munched a wafer of lembas. “That 
was a mighty shot in the dark, my friend!’ 

‘But who can say what it hit?’ said Legolas. 

‘T cannot,’ said Gimli. ‘But Iam glad that the shadow came 
no nearer. I liked it not at all. Too much it reminded me of 
the shadow in Moria — the shadow of the Balrog,’ he ended 
in a whisper. 

‘It was not a Balrog,’ said Frodo, still shivering with the 
chill that had come upon him. ‘It was something colder. I 
think it was > Then he paused and fell silent. 

‘What do you think?’ asked Boromir eagerly, leaning from 
his boat, as if he was trying to catch a glimpse of Frodo’s face. 

‘I think—No, I will not say,’ answered Frodo. ‘Whatever 
it was, its fall has dismayed our enemies.’ 

‘So it seems,’ said Aragorn. ‘Yet where they are, and how 
many, and what they will do next, we do not know. This 
night we must all be sleepless! Dark hides us now. But what 


506 THE FELLOWSHIP OF THE RING 


the day will show who can tell? Have your weapons close to 
hand!’ 


Sam sat tapping the hilt of his sword as if he were counting 
on his fingers, and looking up at the sky. ‘It’s very strange,’ 
he murmured. “The Moon’s the same in the Shire and in 
Wilderland, or it ought to be. But either it’s out of its running, 
or ’m all wrong in my reckoning. You’ll remember, Mr. 
Frodo, the Moon was waning as we lay on the flet up in that 
tree: a week from the full, I reckon. And we’d been a week 
on the way last night, when up pops a New Moon as thin as 
a nail-paring, as if we had never stayed no time in the Elvish 
country. 

‘Well, I can remember three nights there for certain, and I 
seem to remember several more, but I would take my oath it 
was never a whole month. Anyone would think that time did 
not count in there!’ 

‘And perhaps that was the way of it,’ said Frodo. ‘In that 
land, maybe, we were in a time that has elsewhere long gone 
by. It was not, I think, until Silverlode bore us back to Anduin 
that we returned to the time that flows through mortal lands 
to the Great Sea. And I don’t remember any moon, either 
new or old, in Caras Galadhon: only stars by night and sun 
by day.’ 

Legolas stirred in his boat. ‘Nay, time does not tarry ever,’ 
he said; ‘but change and growth is not in all things and places 
alike. For the Elves the world moves, and it moves both very 
swift and very slow. Swift, because they themselves change 
little, and all else fleets by: it is a grief to them. Slow, because 
they need not count the running years, not for themselves. 
The passing seasons are but ripples ever repeated in the long 
long stream. Yet beneath the Sun all things must wear to an 
end at last.’ 

‘But the wearing is slow in Lorien,’ said Frodo. “The power 
of the Lady is on it. Rich are the hours, though short they 
seem, in Caras Galadhon, where Galadriel wields the Elven- 
ring.’ 


THE GREAT RIVER 507 


“That should not have been said outside Lorien, not even 
to me,’ said Aragorn. ‘Speak no more of it! But so it is, Sam: 
in that land you lost your count. There time flowed swiftly 
by us, as for the Elves. The old moon passed, and a new 
moon waxed and waned in the world outside, while we tarried 
there. And yestereve a new moon came again. Winter is 
nearly gone. Time flows on to a spring of little hope.’ 


The night passed silently. No voice or call was heard again 
across the water. The travellers huddled in their boats felt the 
changing of the weather. The air grew warm and very still 
under the great moist clouds that had floated up from the 
South and the distant seas. The rushing of the River over 
the rocks of the rapids seemed to grow louder and closer. 
The twigs of the trees above them began to drip. 

When the day came the mood of the world about them had 
become soft and sad. Slowly the dawn grew to a pale light, 
diffused and shadowless. There was mist on the River, and 
white fog swathed the shore; the far bank could not be seen. 

‘I can’t abide fog,’ said Sam; ‘but this seems to be a lucky 
one. Now perhaps we can get away without those cursed 
goblins seeing us.’ 

‘Perhaps so,’ said Aragorn. ‘But it will be hard to find the 
path unless the fog lifts a little later on. And we must find the 
path, if we are to pass Sarn Gebir and come to the Emyn 
Muil.’ 

‘I do not see why we should pass the Rapids or follow the 
River any further,’ said Boromir. ‘If the Emyn Muil lie before 
us, then we can abandon these cockle-boats, and strike west- 
ward and southward, until we come to the Entwash and cross 
into my own land.’ 

‘We can, if we are making for Minas Tirith,’ said Aragorn, 
‘but that is not yet agreed. And such a course may be more 
perilous than it sounds. The vale of Entwash is flat and fenny, 
and fog is a deadly peril there for those on foot and laden. I 
would not abandon our boats until we must. The River is at 
least a path that cannot be missed.’ 


508 THE FELLOWSHIP OF THE RING 


‘But the Enemy holds the eastern bank,’ objected Boromir. 
‘And even if you pass the Gates of Argonath and come 
unmolested to the Tindrock, what will you do then? Leap 
down the Falls and land in the marshes?’ 

‘No!’ answered Aragorn. ‘Say rather that we will bear our 
boats by the ancient way to Rauros-foot, and there take to 
the water again. Do you not know, Boromir, or do you choose 
to forget the North Stair, and the high seat upon Amon Hen, 
that were made in the days of the great kings? I at least have 
a mind to stand in that high place again, before I decide my 
further course. There, maybe, we shall see some sign that 
will guide us.’ 

Boromir held out long against this choice; but when it 
became plain that Frodo would follow Aragorn, wherever he 
went, he gave in. ‘It is not the way of the Men of Minas 
Tirith to desert their friends at need,’ he said, ‘and you will 
need my strength, if ever you are to reach the Tindrock. To 
the tall isle I will go, but no further. There I shall turn to my 
home, alone if my help has not earned the reward of any 
companionship.’ 


The day was now growing, and the fog had lifted a little. 
It was decided that Aragorn and Legolas should at once go 
forward along the shore, while the others remained by the 
boats. Aragorn hoped to find some way by which they could 
carry both their boats and their baggage to the smoother 
water beyond the Rapids. 

‘Boats of the Elves would not sink, maybe,’ he said, ‘but 
that does not say that we should come through Sarn Gebir 
alive. None have ever done so yet. No road was made by the 
Men of Gondor in this region, for even in their great days 
their realm did not reach up Anduin beyond the Emyn Muil; 
but there is a portage-way somewhere on the western shore, 
if I can find it. It cannot yet have perished; for light boats 
used to journey out of Wilderland down to Osgiliath, and still 
did so until a few years ago, when the Orcs of Mordor began 
to multiply.’ 


THE GREAT RIVER 509 


‘Seldom in my life has any boat come out of the North, and 
the Orcs prowl on the east-shore,’ said Boromir. ‘If you go for- 
ward, peril will grow with every mile, even if you find a path.’ 

‘Peril lies ahead on every southward road,’ answered 
Aragorn. ‘Wait for us one day. If we do not return in that 
time, you will know that evil has indeed befallen us. Then 
you must take a new leader and follow him as best you can.’ 

It was with a heavy heart that Frodo saw Aragorn and 
Legolas climb the steep bank and vanish into the mists; but 
his fears proved groundless. Only two or three hours had 
passed, and it was barely mid-day, when the shadowy shapes 
of the explorers appeared again. 

‘All is well,’ said Aragorn, as he clambered down the bank. 
“There is a track, and it leads to a good landing that is still 
serviceable. The distance is not great: the head of the Rapids 
is but half a mile below us, and they are little more than a 
mile long. Not far beyond them the stream becomes clear 
and smooth again, though it runs swiftly. Our hardest task 
will be to get our boats and baggage to the old portage-way. 
We have found it, but it lies well back from the water-side 
here, and runs under the lee of a rock-wall, a furlong or more 
from the shore. We did not find where the northward landing 
lies. If it still remains, we must have passed it yesterday night. 
We might labour far upstream and yet miss it in the fog. I 
fear we must leave the River now, and make for the portage- 
way as best we can from here.’ 

“That would not be easy, even if we were all Men,’ said 
Boromir. 

“Yet such as we are we will try it,’ said Aragorn. 

“Aye, we will,’ said Gimli. “The legs of Men will lag on a 
rough road, while a Dwarf goes on, be the burden twice his 
own weight, Master Boromir!’ 


The task proved hard indeed, yet in the end it was done. 
The goods were taken out of the boats and brought to the 
top of the bank, where there was a level space. Then the 
boats were drawn out of the water and carried up. They were 


510 THE FELLOWSHIP OF THE RING 


far less heavy than any had expected. Of what tree growing 
in the Elvish country they were made not even Legolas knew; 
but the wood was tough and yet strangely light. Merry and 
Pippin alone could carry their boat with ease along the flat. 
Nonetheless it needed the strength of the two Men to lift and 
haul them over the ground that the Company now had to 
cross. It sloped up away from the River, a tumbled waste of 
grey limestone-boulders, with many hidden holes shrouded 
with weeds and bushes; there were thickets of brambles, and 
sheer dells; and here and there boggy pools fed by waters 
trickling from the terraces further inland. 

One by one Boromir and Aragorn carried the boats, while 
the others toiled and scrambled after them with the baggage. 
At last all was removed and laid on the portage-way. Then 
with little further hindrance, save from sprawling briars and 
many fallen stones, they moved forward all together. Fog still 
hung in veils upon the crumbling rock-wall, and to their 
left mist shrouded the River: they could hear it rushing and 
foaming over the sharp shelves and stony teeth of Sarn Gebir, 
but they could not see it. Twice they made the journey, before 
all was brought safe to the southern landing. 

There the portage-way, turning back to the water-side, ran 
gently down to the shallow edge of a little pool. It seemed to 
have been scooped in the river-side, not by hand, but by the 
water swirling down from Sarn Gebir against a low pier of 
rock that jutted out some way into the stream. Beyond it the 
shore rose sheer into a grey cliff, and there was no further 
passage for those on foot. 

Already the short afternoon was past, and a dim cloudy 
dusk was closing in. They sat beside the water listening to 
the confused rush and roar of the Rapids hidden in the mist; 
they were tired and sleepy, and their hearts were as gloomy 
as the dying day. 

‘Well, here we are, and here we must pass another night,’ 
said Boromir. ‘We need sleep, and even if Aragorn had a 
mind to pass the Gates of Argonath by night, we are all too 
tired — except, no doubt, our sturdy dwarf.’ 


THE GREAT RIVER SII 


Gimli made no reply: he was nodding as he sat. 

‘Let us rest as much as we can now,’ said Aragorn. 
“Tomorrow we must journey by day again. Unless the 
weather changes once more and cheats us, we shall have a 
good chance of slipping through, unseen by any eyes on the 
eastern shore. But tonight two must watch together in turns: 
three hours off and one on guard.’ 


Nothing happened that night worse than a brief drizzle of 
rain an hour before dawn. As soon as it was fully light they 
started. Already the fog was thinning. They kept as close as 
they could to the western side, and they could see the dim 
shapes of the low cliffs rising ever higher, shadowy walls with 
their feet in the hurrying river. In the mid-morning the clouds 
drew down lower, and it began to rain heavily. They drew 
the skin-covers over their boats to prevent them from being 
flooded, and drifted on; little could be seen before them or 
about them through the grey falling curtains. 

The rain, however, did not last long. Slowly the sky above 
grew lighter, and then suddenly the clouds broke, and their 
draggled fringes trailed away northward up the River. The 
fogs and mists were gone. Before the travellers lay a wide 
ravine, with great rocky sides to which clung, upon shelves 
and in narrow crevices, a few thrawn trees. The channel grew 
narrower and the River swifter. Now they were speeding 
along with little hope of stopping or turning, whatever they 
might meet ahead. Over them was a lane of pale-blue sky, 
around them the dark overshadowed River, and before them 
black, shutting out the sun, the hills of Emyn Muil, in which 
no opening could be seen. 

Frodo peering forward saw in the distance two great rocks 
approaching: like great pinnacles or pillars of stone they 
seemed. Tall and sheer and ominous they stood upon either 
side of the stream. A narrow gap appeared between them, 
and the River swept the boats towards it. 

‘Behold the Argonath, the Pillars of the Kings!’ cried 
Aragorn. ‘We shall pass them soon. Keep the boats in line, 


512 THE FELLOWSHIP OF THE RING 


and as far apart as you can! Hold the middle of the stream!’ 

As Frodo was borne towards them the great pillars rose 
like towers to meet him. Giants they seemed to him, vast grey 
figures silent but threatening. Then he saw that they were 
indeed shaped and fashioned: the craft and power of old had 
wrought upon them, and still they preserved through the suns 
and rains of forgotten years the mighty likenesses in which 
they had been hewn. Upon great pedestals founded in the 
deep waters stood two great kings of stone: still with blurred 
eyes and crannied brows they frowned upon the North. The 
left hand of each was raised palm outwards in gesture of 
warning; in each right hand there was an axe; upon each head 
there was a crumbling helm and crown. Great power and 
majesty they still wore, the silent wardens of a long-vanished 
kingdom. Awe and fear fell upon Frodo, and he cowered 
down, shutting his eyes and not daring to look up as the boat 
drew near. Even Boromir bowed his head as the boats whirled 
by, frail and fleeting as little leaves, under the enduring 
shadow of the sentinels of Numenor. So they passed into the 
dark chasm of the Gates. 

Sheer rose the dreadful cliffs to unguessed heights on either 
side. Far off was the dim sky. The black waters roared and 
echoed, and a wind screamed over them. Frodo crouching 
over his knees heard Sam in front muttering and groaning: 
‘What a place! What a horrible place! Just let me get out of 
this boat, and [ll never wet my toes in a puddle again, let 
alone a river!’ 

‘Fear not!’ said a strange voice behind him. Frodo turned 
and saw Strider, and yet not Strider; for the weatherworn 
Ranger was no longer there. In the stern sat Aragorn son of 
Arathorn, proud and erect, guiding the boat with skilful 
strokes; his hood was cast back, and his dark hair was blowing 
in the wind, a light was in his eyes: a king returning from 
exile to his own land. 

‘Fear not!’ he said. ‘Long have I desired to look upon the 
likenesses of Isildur and Anarion, my sires of old. Under their 
shadow Elessar, the Elfstone son of Arathorn of the House 


THE GREAT RIVER 513 


of Valandil Isildur’s son, heir of Elendil, has naught to dread!’ 

Then the light of his eyes faded, and he spoke to himself: 
‘Would that Gandalf were here! How my heart yearns for 
Minas Anor and the walls of my own city! But whither now 
shall I go?’ 

The chasm was long and dark, and filled with the noise of 
wind and rushing water and echoing stone. It bent somewhat 
towards the west so that at first all was dark ahead; but soon 
Frodo saw a tall gap of light before him, ever growing. Swiftly 
it drew near, and suddenly the boats shot through, out into 
a wide clear light. 


The sun, already long fallen from the noon, was shining in 
a windy sky. The pent waters spread out into a long oval 
lake, pale Nen Hithoel, fenced by steep grey hills whose sides 
were clad with trees, but their heads were bare, cold-gleaming 
in the sunlight. At the far southern end rose three peaks. 
The midmost stood somewhat forward from the others and 
sundered from them, an island in the waters, about which 
the flowing River flung pale shimmering arms. Distant but 
deep there came up on the wind a roaring sound like the roll 
of thunder heard far away. 

‘Behold Tol Brandir!’ said Aragorn, pointing south to the 
tall peak. ‘Upon the left stands Amon Lhaw, and upon the 
right is Amon Hen, the Hills of Hearing and of Sight. In 
the days of the great kings there were high seats upon them, 
and watch was kept there. But it is said that no foot of man 
or beast has ever been set upon Tol Brandir. Ere the shade 
of night falls we shall come to them. I hear the endless voice 
of Rauros calling.’ 

The Company rested now for a while, drifting south on 
the current that flowed through the middle of the lake. They 
ate some food, and then they took to their paddles and 
hastened on their way. The sides of the westward hills fell 
into shadow, and the Sun grew round and red. Here and 
there a misty star peered out. The three peaks loomed before 
them, darkling in the twilight. Rauros was roaring with a great 


514 THE FELLOWSHIP OF THE RING 


voice. Already night was laid on the flowing waters when the 
travellers came at last under the shadow of the hills. 

The tenth day of their journey was over. Wilderland was 
behind them. They could go no further without choice 
between the east-way and the west. The last stage of the 
Quest was before them. 


Chapter 10 


THE BREAKING OF THE FELLOWSHIP 


Aragorn led them to the right arm of the River. Here upon 
its western side under the shadow of Tol Brandir a green 
lawn ran down to the water from the feet of Amon Hen. 
Behind it rose the first gentle slopes of the hill clad with trees, 
and trees marched away westward along the curving shores 
of the lake. A little spring fell tumbling down and fed the 
grass. 

‘Here we will rest tonight,’ said Aragorn. “This is the lawn 
of Parth Galen: a fair place in the summer days of old. Let 
us hope that no evil has yet come here.’ 

They drew up their boats on the green banks, and beside 
them they made their camp. They set a watch, but had no 
sight nor sound of their enemies. If Gollum had contrived to 
follow them, he remained unseen and unheard. Nonetheless 
as the night wore on Aragorn grew uneasy, tossing often in 
his sleep and waking. In the small hours he got up and came 
to Frodo, whose turn it was to watch. 

‘Why are you waking?’ asked Frodo. ‘It is not your watch.’ 

‘I do not know,’ answered Aragorn; ‘but a shadow and a 
threat has been growing in my sleep. It would be well to draw 
your sword.’ 

‘Why?’ said Frodo. ‘Are enemies at hand?’ 

‘Let us see what Sting may show,’ answered Aragorn. 

Frodo then drew the elf-blade from its sheath. To his dis- 
may the edges gleamed dimly in the night. ‘Orcs!’ he said. 
‘Not very near, and yet too near, it seems.’ 

‘I feared as much,’ said Aragorn. “But maybe they are not 
on this side of the River. The light of Sting is faint, and it 
may point to no more than spies of Mordor roaming on the 
slopes of Amon Lhaw. I have never heard before of Orcs 


516 THE FELLOWSHIP OF THE RING 


upon Amon Hen. Yet who knows what may happen in these 
evil days, now that Minas Tirith no longer holds secure the 
passages of Anduin. We must go warily tomorrow.’ 


The day came like fire and smoke. Low in the East there 
were black bars of cloud like the fumes of a great burning. 
The rising sun lit them from beneath with flames of murky 
red; but soon it climbed above them into a clear sky. The 
summit of Tol Brandir was tipped with gold. Frodo looked 
out eastward and gazed at the tall island. Its sides sprang 
sheer out of the running water. High up above the tall cliffs 
were steep slopes upon which trees climbed, mounting one 
head above another; and above them again were grey faces 
of inaccessible rock, crowned by a great spire of stone. Many 
birds were circling about it, but no sign of other living things 
could be seen. 

When they had eaten, Aragorn called the Company 
together. “The day has come at last,’ he said: ‘the day of 
choice which we have long delayed. What shall now become 
of our Company that has travelled so far in fellowship? Shall 
we turn west with Boromir and go to the wars of Gondor; or 
turn east to the Fear and Shadow; or shall we break our 
fellowship and go this way and that as each may choose? 
Whatever we do must be done soon. We cannot long halt 
here. The enemy is on the eastern shore, we know; but I fear 
that the Orcs may already be on this side of the water.’ 

There was a long silence in which no one spoke or moved. 

‘Well, Frodo,’ said Aragorn at last. ‘I fear that the burden 
is laid upon you. You are the Bearer appointed by the Coun- 
cil. Your own way you alone can choose. In this matter I 
cannot advise you. I am not Gandalf, and though I have tried 
to bear his part, I do not know what design or hope he had 
for this hour, if indeed he had any. Most likely it seems that 
if he were here now the choice would still wait on you. Such 
is your fate.’ 

Frodo did not answer at once. Then he spoke slowly. ‘I 
know that haste is needed, yet I cannot choose. The burden 


THE BREAKING OF THE FELLOWSHIP SF 


is heavy. Give me an hour longer, and I will speak. Let me 
be alone!’ 

Aragorn looked at him with kindly pity. “Very well, Frodo 
son of Drogo,’ he said. ‘You shall have an hour, and you 
shall be alone. We will stay here for a while. But do not stray 
far or out of call.’ 

Frodo sat for a moment with his head bowed. Sam, who 
had been watching his master with great concern, shook his 
head and muttered: ‘Plain as a pikestaff it is, but it’s no good 
Sam Gamgee putting in his spoke just now.’ 

Presently Frodo got up and walked away; and Sam saw 
that while the others restrained themselves and did not stare 
at him, the eyes of Boromir followed Frodo intently, until he 
passed out of sight in the trees at the foot of Amon Hen. 


Wandering aimlessly at first in the wood, Frodo found that 
his feet were leading him up towards the slopes of the hill. 
He came to a path, the dwindling ruins of a road of long ago. 
In steep places stairs of stone had been hewn, but now they 
were cracked and worn, and split by the roots of trees. For 
some while he climbed, not caring which way he went, until 
he came to a grassy place. Rowan-trees grew about it, and in 
the midst was a wide flat stone. The little upland lawn was 
open upon the East and was filled now with the early sunlight. 
Frodo halted and looked out over the River, far below him, 
to Tol Brandir and the birds wheeling in the great gulf of air 
between him and the untrodden isle. The voice of Rauros 
was a mighty roaring mingled with a deep throbbing boom. 

He sat down upon the stone and cupped his chin in his 
hands, staring eastwards but seeing little with his eyes. All 
that had happened since Bilbo left the Shire was passing 
through his mind, and he recalled and pondered everything 
that he could remember of Gandalf’s words. Time went on, 
and still he was no nearer to a choice. 

Suddenly he awoke from his thoughts: a strange feeling 
came to him that something was behind him, that unfriendly 
eyes were upon him. He sprang up and turned; but all that 


518 THE FELLOWSHIP OF THE RING 


he saw to his surprise was Boromir, and his face was smiling 
and kind. 

‘I was afraid for you, Frodo,’ he said, coming forward. ‘If 
Aragorn is right and Orcs are near, then none of us should 
wander alone, and you least of all: so much depends on you. 
And my heart too is heavy. May I stay now and talk for a 
while, since I have found you? It would comfort me. Where 
there are so many, all speech becomes a debate without end. 
But two together may perhaps find wisdom.’ 

“You are kind,’ answered Frodo. ‘But I do not think that 
any speech will help me. For I know what I should do, but I 
am afraid of doing it, Boromir: afraid.’ 

Boromir stood silent. Rauros roared endlessly on. The 
wind murmured in the branches of the trees. Frodo shivered. 

Suddenly Boromir came and sat beside him. ‘Are you sure 
that you do not suffer needlessly?’ he said. ‘I wish to help you. 
You need counsel in your hard choice. Will you not take mine?’ 

‘T think I know already what counsel you would give, 
Boromir,’ said Frodo. ‘And it would seem like wisdom but 
for the warning of my heart.’ 

‘Warning? Warning against what?’ said Boromir sharply. 

‘Against delay. Against the way that seems easier. Against 
refusal of the burden that is laid on me. Against — well, if it 
must be said, against trust in the strength and truth of Men.’ 

“Yet that strength has long protected you far away in your 
little country, though you knew it not.’ 

‘I do not doubt the valour of your people. But the world is 
changing. The walls of Minas Tirith may be strong, but they 
are not strong enough. If they fail, what then?’ 

‘We shall fall in battle valiantly. Yet there is still hope that 
they will not fail.’ 

‘No hope while the Ring lasts,’ said Frodo. 

‘Ah! The Ring!’ said Boromir, his eyes lighting. “The Ring! 
Is it not a strange fate that we should suffer so much fear and 
doubt for so small a thing? So small a thing! And I have seen 
it only for an instant in the house of Elrond. Could I not have 
a sight of it again?’ 


THE BREAKING OF THE FELLOWSHIP S19 


Frodo looked up. His heart went suddenly cold. He caught 
the strange gleam in Boromir’s eyes, yet his face was still kind 
and friendly. ‘It is best that it should lie hidden,’ he answered. 

‘As you wish. I care not,’ said Boromir. ‘Yet may I not 
even speak of it? For you seem ever to think only of its power 
in the hands of the Enemy: of its evil uses not of its good. 
The world is changing, you say. Minas ‘Tirith will fall, if the 
Ring lasts. But why? Certainly, if the Ring were with the 
Enemy. But why, if it were with us?’ 

‘Were you not at the Council?’ answered Frodo. “Because 
we cannot use it, and what is done with it turns to evil.’ 

Boromir got up and walked about impatiently. ‘So you go 
on,’ he cried. ‘Gandalf, Elrond — all these folk have taught 
you to say so. For themselves they may be right. These elves 
and half-elves and wizards, they would come to grief perhaps. 
Yet often I doubt if they are wise and not merely timid. But 
each to his own kind. True-hearted Men, they will not be 
corrupted. We of Minas Tirith have been staunch through 
long years of trial. We do not desire the power of wizard- 
lords, only strength to defend ourselves, strength in a just 
cause. And behold! in our need chance brings to light the 
Ring of Power. It is a gift, I say; a gift to the foes of Mordor. 
It is mad not to use it, to use the power of the Enemy against 
him. The fearless, the ruthless, these alone will achieve vic- 
tory. What could not a warrior do in this hour, a great leader? 
What could not Aragorn do? Or if he refuses, why not 
Boromir? The Ring would give me power of Command. 
How I would drive the hosts of Mordor, and all men would 
flock to my banner!’ 

Boromir strode up and down, speaking ever more loudly. 
Almost he seemed to have forgotten Frodo, while his talk 
dwelt on walls and weapons, and the mustering of men; and 
he drew plans for great alliances and glorious victories to be; 
and he cast down Mordor, and became himself a mighty 
king, benevolent and wise. Suddenly he stopped and waved 
his arms. 

‘And they tell us to throw it away!’ he cried. ‘I do not say 


520 THE FELLOWSHIP OF THE RING 


destroy it. That might be well, if reason could show any hope 
of doing so. It does not. The only plan that is proposed to 
us is that a halfling should walk blindly into Mordor and 
offer the Enemy every chance of recapturing it for himself. 
Folly! 

‘Surely you see it, my friend?’ he said, turning now sud- 
denly to Frodo again. ‘You say that you are afraid. If it is so, 
the boldest should pardon you. But is it not really your good 
sense that revolts?’ 

‘No, I am afraid,’ said Frodo. ‘Simply afraid. But Iam glad 
to have heard you speak so fully. My mind is clearer now.’ 

“Then you will come to Minas Tirith?’ cried Boromir. His 
eyes were shining and his face eager. 

“You misunderstand me,’ said Frodo. 

‘But you will come, at least for a while?’ Boromir persisted. 
‘My city is not far now; and it is little further from there to 
Mordor than from here. We have been long in the wilderness, 
and you need news of what the Enemy is doing before you 
make a move. Come with me, Frodo,’ he said. ‘You need rest 
before your venture, if go you must.’ He laid his hand on the 
hobbit’s shoulder in friendly fashion; but Frodo felt the hand 
trembling with suppressed excitement. He stepped quickly 
away, and eyed with alarm the tall Man, nearly twice his 
height and many times his match in strength. 

‘Why are you so unfriendly?’ said Boromir. ‘I am a true 
man, neither thief nor tracker. I need your Ring: that you 
know now; but I give you my word that I do not desire to 
keep it. Will you not at least let me make trial of my plan? 
Lend me the Ring!’ 

‘No! no!’ cried Frodo. “The Council laid it upon me to 
bear it.’ 

‘It is by our own folly that the Enemy will defeat us,’ cried 
Boromir. ‘How it angers me! Fool! Obstinate fool! Running 
wilfully to death and ruining our cause. If any mortals have 
claim to the Ring, it is the men of Numenor, and not 
Halflings. It is not yours save by unhappy chance. It might 
have been mine. It should be mine. Give it to me!’ 


THE BREAKING OF THE FELLOWSHIP 521 


Frodo did not answer, but moved away till the great flat 
stone stood between them. ‘Come, come, my friend!’ said 
Boromir in a softer voice. ‘Why not get rid of it? Why not be 
free of your doubt and fear? You can lay the blame on me, 
if you will. You can say that I was too strong and took it by 
force. For I am too strong for you, halfling,’ he cried; and 
suddenly he sprang over the stone and leaped at Frodo. His 
fair and pleasant face was hideously changed; a raging fire 
was in his eyes. 

Frodo dodged aside and again put the stone between them. 
There was only one thing he could do: trembling he pulled 
out the Ring upon its chain and quickly slipped it on his 
finger, even as Boromir sprang at him again. The Man 
gasped, stared for a moment amazed, and then ran wildly 
about, seeking here and there among the rocks and trees. 

‘Miserable trickster!’ he shouted. ‘Let me get my hands on 
you! Now I see your mind. You will take the Ring to Sauron 
and sell us all. You have only waited your chance to leave us 
in the lurch. Curse you and all halflings to death and dark- 
ness!’ Then, catching his foot on a stone, he fell sprawling 
and lay upon his face. For a while he was as still as if his own 
curse had struck him down; then suddenly he wept. 

He rose and passed his hand over his eyes, dashing away 
the tears. “What have I said?’ he cried. “What have I done? 
Frodo, Frodo!’ he called. ‘Come back! A madness took me, 
but it has passed. Come back!’ 


There was no answer. Frodo did not even hear his cries. 
He was already far away, leaping blindly up the path to the 
hill-top. Terror and grief shook him, seeing in his thought 
the mad fierce face of Boromir, and his burning eyes. 

Soon he came out alone on the summit of Amon Hen, and 
halted, gasping for breath. He saw as through a mist a wide 
flat circle, paved with mighty flags, and surrounded with a 
crumbling battlement; and in the middle, set upon four 
carven pillars, was a high seat, reached by a stair of many 
steps. Up he went and sat upon the ancient chair, feeling like 


522 THE FELLOWSHIP OF THE RING 


a lost child that had clambered upon the throne of mountain- 
kings. 

At first he could see little. He seemed to be in a world of 
mist in which there were only shadows: the Ring was upon 
him. Then here and there the mist gave way and he saw 
many visions: small and clear as if they were under his eyes 
upon a table, and yet remote. There was no sound, only 
bright living images. The world seemed to have shrunk and 
fallen silent. He was sitting upon the Seat of Seeing, on Amon 
Hen, the Hill of the Eye of the Men of Numenor. Eastward 
he looked into wide uncharted lands, nameless plains, and 
forests unexplored. Northward he looked, and the Great 
River lay like a ribbon beneath him, and the Misty Mountains 
stood small and hard as broken teeth. Westward he looked 
and saw the broad pastures of Rohan; and Orthanc, the 
pinnacle of Isengard, like a black spike. Southward he 
looked, and below his very feet the Great River curled like a 
toppling wave and plunged over the falls of Rauros into a 
foaming pit; a glimmering rainbow played upon the fume. 
And Ethir Anduin he saw, the mighty delta of the River, and 
myriads of sea-birds whirling like a white dust in the sun, 
and beneath them a green and silver sea, rippling in endless 
lines. 

But everywhere he looked he saw the signs of war. The 
Misty Mountains were crawling like anthills: orcs were issuing 
out of a thousand holes. Under the boughs of Mirkwood 
there was deadly strife of Elves and Men and fell beasts. The 
land of the Beornings was aflame; a cloud was over Moria; 
smoke rose on the borders of Lorien. 

Horsemen were galloping on the grass of Rohan; wolves 
poured from Isengard. From the havens of Harad ships of 
war put out to sea; and out of the East Men were moving 
endlessly: swordsmen, spearmen, bowmen upon horses, 
chariots of chieftains and laden wains. All the power of the 
Dark Lord was in motion. Then turning south again he beheld 
Minas Tirith. Far away it seemed, and beautiful: white-walled, 
many-towered, proud and fair upon its mountain-seat; its 


THE BREAKING OF THE FELLOWSHIP 523 


battlements glittered with steel, and its turrets were bright with 
many banners. Hope leaped in his heart. But against Minas 
Tirith was set another fortress, greater and more strong. 
Thither, eastward, unwilling his eye was drawn. It passed 
the ruined bridges of Osgiliath, the grinning gates of Minas 
Morgul, and the haunted Mountains, and it looked upon 
Gorgoroth, the valley of terror in the Land of Mordor. Dark- 
ness lay there under the Sun. Fire glowed amid the smoke. 
Mount Doom was burning, and a great reek rising. ‘Then 
at last his gaze was held: wall upon wall, battlhement upon 
battlement, black, immeasurably strong, mountain of iron, 
gate of steel, tower of adamant, he saw it: Barad-dur, Fortress 
of Sauron. All hope left him. 

And suddenly he felt the Eye. There was an eye in the 
Dark Tower that did not sleep. He knew that it had become 
aware of his gaze. A fierce eager will was there. It leaped 
towards him; almost like a finger he felt it, searching for him. 
Very soon it would nail him down, know just exactly where 
he was. Amon Lhaw it touched. It glanced upon Tol Brandir 
— he threw himself from the seat, crouching, covering his 
head with his grey hood. 

He heard himself crying out: Never, never! Or was it: Verily 
I come, I come to you? He could not tell. Then as a flash from 
some other point of power there came to his mind another 
thought: Take it off! Take it off! Fool, take it off! Take off the 
Ring! 

The two powers strove in him. For a moment, perfectly 
balanced between their piercing points, he writhed, tor- 
mented. Suddenly he was aware of himself again, Frodo, 
neither the Voice nor the Eye: free to choose, and with one 
remaining instant in which to do so. He took the Ring off his 
finger. He was kneeling in clear sunlight before the high seat. 
A black shadow seemed to pass like an arm above him; it 
missed Amon Hen and groped out west, and faded. Then all 
the sky was clean and blue and birds sang in every tree. 

Frodo rose to his feet. A great weariness was on him, but 
his will was firm and his heart lighter. He spoke aloud to 


524 THE FELLOWSHIP OF THE RING 


himself. ‘I will do now what I must,’ he said. “This at least is 
plain: the evil of the Ring is already at work even in the 
Company, and the Ring must leave them before it does more 
harm. I will go alone. Some I cannot trust, and those I can 
trust are too dear to me: poor old Sam, and Merry and 
Pippin. Strider, too: his heart yearns for Minas Tirith, and 
he will be needed there, now Boromir has fallen into evil. I 
will go alone. At once.’ 

He went quickly down the path and came back to the lawn 
where Boromir had found him. Then he halted, listening. He 
thought he could hear cries and calls from the woods near 
the shore below. 

“They'll be hunting for me,’ he said. ‘I wonder how long I 
have been away. Hours, I should think.’ He hesitated. “What 
can I do?’ he muttered. ‘I must go now or I shall never go. I 
shan’t get a chance again. I hate leaving them, and like this 
without any explanation. But surely they will understand. 
Sam will. And what else can I do?’ 

Slowly he drew out the Ring and put it on once more. He 
vanished and passed down the hill, less than a rustle of the 
wind. 


The others remained long by the river-side. For some time 
they had been silent, moving restlessly about; but now they 
were sitting in a circle, and they were talking. Every now and 
again they made efforts to speak of other things, of their 
long road and many adventures; they questioned Aragorn 
concerning the realm of Gondor and its ancient history, and 
the remnants of its great works that could still be seen in this 
strange border-land of the Emyn Muil: the stone kings and 
the seats of Lhaw and Hen, and the great Stair beside the 
falls of Rauros. But always their thoughts and words strayed 
back to Frodo and the Ring. What would Frodo choose to 
do? Why was he hesitating? 

‘He is debating which course is the most desperate, I think,’ 
said Aragorn. ‘And well he may. It is now more hopeless than 
ever for the Company to go east, since we have been tracked 


THE BREAKING OF THE FELLOWSHIP 525 


by Gollum, and must fear that the secret of our journey is 
already betrayed. But Minas Tirith is no nearer to the Fire 
and the destruction of the Burden. 

‘We may remain there for a while and make a brave stand; 
but the Lord Denethor and all his men cannot hope to do 
what even Elrond said was beyond his power: either to keep 
the Burden secret, or to hold off the full might of the Enemy 
when he comes to take it. Which way would any of us choose 
in Frodo’s place? I do not know. Now indeed we miss 
Gandalf most.’ 

‘Grievous is our loss,’ said Legolas. “Yet we must needs 
make up our minds without his aid. Why cannot we decide, 
and so help Frodo? Let us call him back and then vote! I 
should vote for Minas Tirith.’ 

‘And so should I,’ said Gimli. ‘We, of course, were only 
sent to help the Bearer along the road, to go no further than 
we wished; and none of us is under any oath or command to 
seek Mount Doom. Hard was my parting from Lothlorien. 
Yet I have come so far, and I say this: now we have reached 
the last choice, it is clear to me that I cannot leave Frodo. I 
would choose Minas Tirith, but if he does not, then I follow 
him.’ 

‘And I too will go with him,’ said Legolas. ‘It would be 
faithless now to say farewell.’ 

‘It would indeed be a betrayal, if we all left him,’ said 
Aragorn. ‘But if he goes east, then all need not go with him; 
nor do I think that all should. That venture is desperate: as 
much so for eight as for three or two, or one alone. If you 
would let me choose, then I should appoint three com- 
panions: Sam, who could not bear it otherwise; and Gimli; 
and myself. Boromir will return to his own city, where his 
father and his people need him; and with him the others 
should go, or at least Meriadoc and Peregrin, if Legolas is 
not willing to leave us.’ 

“That won’t do at all!’ cried Merry. ‘We can’t leave Frodo! 
Pippin and I always intended to go wherever he went, and 
we still do. But we did not realize what that would mean. It 


526 THE FELLOWSHIP OF THE RING 


seemed different so far away, in the Shire or in Rivendell. It 
would be mad and cruel to let Frodo go to Mordor. Why 
can’t we stop him?’ 

‘We must stop him,’ said Pippin. ‘And that is what he is 
worrying about, I am sure. He knows we shan’t agree to his 
going east. And he doesn’t like to ask anyone to go with him, 
poor old fellow. Imagine it: going off to Mordor alone!’ 
Pippin shuddered. ‘But the dear silly old hobbit, he ought to 
know that he hasn’t got to ask. He ought to know that if we 
can’t stop him, we shan’t leave him.’ 

‘Begging your pardon,’ said Sam. ‘I don’t think you under- 
stand my master at all. He isn’t hesitating about which way 
to go. Of course not! What’s the good of Minas Tirith 
anyway? To him, I mean, begging your pardon, Master 
Boromir,’ he added, and turned. It was then that they dis- 
covered that Boromir, who at first had been sitting silent on 
the outside of the circle, was no longer there. 

‘Now where’s he got to?’ cried Sam, looking worried. “He’s 
been a bit queer lately, to my mind. But anyway he’s not in 
this business. He’s off to his home, as he always said; and no 
blame to him. But Mr. Frodo, he knows he’s got to find the 
Cracks of Doom, if he can. But he’s afraid. Now it’s come to 
the point, he’s just plain terrified. That’s what his trouble is. 
Of course he’s had a bit of schooling, so to speak — we all 
have — since we left home, or he’d be so terrified he’d just fling 
the Ring in the River and bolt. But he’s still too frightened to 
start. And he isn’t worrying about us either: whether we'll go 
along with him or no. He knows we mean to. That’s another 
thing that’s bothering him. If he screws himself up to go, he’ll 
want to go alone. Mark my words! We’re going to have 
trouble when he comes back. For he’ll screw himself up all 
right, as sure as his name’s Baggins.’ 

‘I believe you speak more wisely than any of us, Sam,’ said 
Aragorn. ‘And what shall we do, if you prove right?’ 

‘Stop him! Don’t let him go!’ cried Pippin. 

‘I wonder?’ said Aragorn. ‘He is the Bearer, and the fate 
of the Burden is on him. I do not think that it is our part to 


THE BREAKING OF THE FELLOWSHIP 527 


drive him one way or the other. Nor do I think that we should 
succeed, if we tried. There are other powers at work far 
stronger.’ 

‘Well, I wish Frodo would “‘screw himself up”? and come 
back, and let us get it over,’ said Pippin. “This waiting is 
horrible! Surely the time is up?’ 

‘Yes,’ said Aragorn. “The hour is long passed. The morning 
is wearing away. We must call for him.’ 


At that moment Boromir reappeared. He came out from 
the trees and walked towards them without speaking. His face 
looked grim and sad. He paused as if counting those that 
were present, and then sat down aloof, with his eyes on the 
ground. 

‘Where have you been, Boromir?’ asked Aragorn. ‘Have 
you seen Frodo?’ 

Boromir hesitated for a second. ‘Yes, and no,’ he answered 
slowly. ‘Yes: I found him some way up the hill, and I spoke 
to him. I urged him to come to Minas Tirith and not to go 
east. I grew angry and he left me. He vanished. I have never 
seen such a thing happen before, though I have heard of it 
in tales. He must have put the Ring on. I could not find him 
again. I thought he would return to you.’ 

‘Ts that all that you have to say?’ said Aragorn, looking hard 
and not too kindly at Boromir. 

‘Yes,’ he answered. ‘I will say no more yet.’ 

“This is bad!’ cried Sam, jumping up. ‘I don’t know what 
this Man has been up to. Why should Mr. Frodo put the 
thing on? He didn’t ought to have; and if he has, goodness 
knows what may have happened!’ 

‘But he wouldn’t keep it on,’ said Merry. ‘Not when he 
had escaped the unwelcome visitor, like Bilbo used to.’ 

‘But where did he go? Where is he?’ cried Pippin. ‘He’s 
been away ages now.’ 

‘How long is it since you saw Frodo last, Boromir?’ asked 
Aragorn. 

‘Half an hour, maybe,’ he answered. ‘Or it might be an 


528 THE FELLOWSHIP OF THE RING 


hour. I have wandered for some time since. I do not know! I 
do not know!’ He put his head in his hands, and sat as if 
bowed with grief. 

‘An hour since he vanished!’ shouted Sam. ‘We must try 
and find him at once. Come on!’ 

‘Wait a moment!’ cried Aragorn. ‘We must divide up into 
pairs, and arrange — here, hold on! Wait!’ 

It was no good. They took no notice of him. Sam had 
dashed off first. Merry and Pippin had followed, and were 
already disappearing westward into the trees by the shore, 
shouting: Frodo! Frodo! in their clear, high, hobbit-voices. 
Legolas and Gimli were running. A sudden panic or madness 
seemed to have fallen on the Company. 

‘We shall all be scattered and lost,’ groaned Aragorn. “Boro- 
mir! Ido not know what part you have played in this mischief, 
but help now! Go after those two young hobbits, and guard 
them at the least, even if you cannot find Frodo. Come back 
to this spot, if you find him, or any traces of him. I shall 
return soon.’ 


Aragorn sprang swiftly away and went in pursuit of Sam. 
Just as he reached the little lawn among the rowans he over- 
took him, toiling uphill, panting and calling, Frodo! 

‘Come with me, Sam!’ he said. ‘None of us should be 
alone. There is mischief about. I feel it. I am going to the 
top, to the Seat of Amon Hen, to see what may be seen. And 
look! It is as my heart guessed, Frodo went this way. Follow 
me, and keep your eyes open!’ He sped up the path. 

Sam did his best, but he could not keep up with Strider 
the Ranger, and soon fell behind. He had not gone far before 
Aragorn was out of sight ahead. Sam stopped and puffed. 
Suddenly he clapped his hand to his head. 

‘Whoa, Sam Gamgee!’ he said aloud. ‘Your legs are too 
short, so use your head! Let me see now! Boromir isn’t lying, 
that’s not his way; but he hasn’t told us everything. Some- 
thing scared Mr. Frodo badly. He screwed himself up to the 
point, sudden. He made up his mind at last — to go. Where 


THE BREAKING OF THE FELLOWSHIP 529 


to? Off East. Not without Sam? Yes, without even his Sam. 
That’s hard, cruel hard.’ 

Sam passed his hand over his eyes, brushing away the 
tears. ‘Steady, Gamgeel” he said. “Think, if you can! He can’t 
fly across rivers, and he can’t jump waterfalls. He’s got no 
gear. So he’s got to get back to the boats. Back to the boats! 
Back to the boats, Sam, like lightning!’ 

Sam turned and bolted back down the path. He fell and 
cut his knees. Up he got and ran on. He came to the edge of 
the lawn of Parth Galen by the shore, where the boats were 
drawn up out of the water. No one was there. There seemed 
to be cries in the woods behind, but he did not heed them. 
He stood gazing for a moment, stock-still, gaping. A boat 
was sliding down the bank all by itself. With a shout Sam 
raced across the grass. The boat slipped into the water. 

‘Coming, Mr. Frodo! Coming!’ called Sam, and flung him- 
self from the bank, clutching at the departing boat. He missed 
it by a yard. With a cry and a splash he fell face downward 
into deep swift water. Gurgling he went under, and the River 
closed over his curly head. 

An exclamation of dismay came from the empty boat. A 
paddle swirled and the boat put about. Frodo was just in 
time to grasp Sam by the hair as he came up, bubbling and 
struggling. Fear was staring in his round brown eyes. 

‘Up you come, Sam my lad!’ said Frodo. ‘Now take my 
hand!’ 

‘Save me, Mr. Frodo!’ gasped Sam. ‘I’m drownded. I can’t 
see your hand.’ 

‘Here it is. Don’t pinch, lad! I won’t let you go. Tread 
water and don’t flounder, or you'll upset the boat. There 
now, get hold of the side, and let me use the paddle!’ 

With a few strokes Frodo brought the boat back to the 
bank, and Sam was able to scramble out, wet as a water-rat. 
Frodo took off the Ring and stepped ashore again. 

‘Of all the confounded nuisances you are the worst, Sam!’ 
he said. 

‘Oh, Mr. Frodo, that’s hard!’ said Sam shivering. “That’s 


530 THE FELLOWSHIP OF THE RING 


hard, trying to go without me and all. If I hadn’t a guessed 
right, where would you be now?’ 

‘Safely on my way.’ 

‘Safely!’ said Sam. ‘All alone and without me to help you? 
I couldn’t have a borne it, it’d have been the death of me.’ 

‘It would be the death of you to come with me, Sam,’ said 
Frodo, ‘and I could not have borne that.’ 

‘Not as certain as being left behind,’ said Sam. 

‘But I am going to Mordor.’ 

‘T know that well enough, Mr. Frodo. Of course you are. 
And I’m coming with you.’ 

‘Now, Sam,’ said Frodo, ‘don’t hinder me! The others will 
be coming back at any minute. If they catch me here, I shall 
have to argue and explain, and I shall never have the heart 
or the chance to get off. But I must go at once. It’s the only 
way.’ 

‘Of course it is,’ answered Sam. ‘But not alone. ’m coming 
too, or neither of us isn’t going. Pll knock holes in all the 
boats first.’ 

Frodo actually laughed. A sudden warmth and gladness 
touched his heart. ‘Leave one!’ he said. ‘We’ll need it. But you 
can’t come like this without your gear or food or anything.’ 

‘Just hold on a moment, and Ill get my stuff! cried Sam 
eagerly. ‘It’s all ready. I thought we should be off today.’ He 
rushed to the camping place, fished out his pack from the 
pile where Frodo had laid it when he emptied the boat of his 
companions’ goods, grabbed a spare blanket, and some extra 
packages of food, and ran back. 

‘So all my plan is spoilt!’ said Frodo. ‘It is no good trying 
to escape you. But I’m glad, Sam. I cannot tell you how glad. 
Come along! It is plain that we were meant to go together. 
We will go, and may the others find a safe road! Strider will 
look after them. I don’t suppose we shall see them again.’ 

“Yet we may, Mr. Frodo. We may,’ said Sam. 


So Frodo and Sam set off on the last stage of the Quest 
together. Frodo paddled away from the shore, and the River 


THE BREAKING OF THE FELLOWSHIP 531 


bore them swiftly away, down the western arm, and past the 
frowning cliffs of Tol Brandir. The roar of the great falls 
drew nearer. Even with such help as Sam could give, it was 
hard work to pass across the current at the southward end of 
the island and drive the boat eastward towards the far shore. 

At length they came to land again upon the southern slopes 
of Amon Lhaw. There they found a shelving shore, and they 
drew the boat out, high above the water, and hid it as well as 
they could behind a great boulder. Then shouldering their 
burdens, they set off, seeking a path that would bring them 
over the grey hills of the Emyn Muil, and down into the Land 
of Shadow. 